PART B
 63. I now turn to my proposals in the field of direct taxes. In framing these
proposals, I have borne in mind certain broad considerations, namely, that the rate of
direct taxes should be such as to promote voluntary compliance; that the farmers,
workers and the middle class should be afforded some relief in pursuance of the
commitment in our Party’s manifesto and some stimulus should be provided for raising
the level of savings and investment in the national economy. At the same time, a
concerted attempt should be made to counter certain widely prevalent devices for tax
avoidance through fragmentation of income and wealth.
 64. The middle class is among the worst hit by the rise in prices in recent
years. As Hon’ble Members are aware, even skilled workers in the organised sector
 13

are now liable to income-tax, at the present level of exemption. in order to afford a
measure of relief to this class of persons, I propose to raise the exemption limit for
income-tax on personal incomes from Rs.10,000 to Rs.12,000. With a view to keeping
the sacrifice of revenue within manageable limits, the nil rate slab of income is being
retained at Rs.8,000. As a result, in cases where the taxable income exceeds Rs.12,000,
the incidence of income-tax, excluding surcharge, will remain at the existing levels,
subject to the grant of marginal relief in cases where the taxable income exceeds the
exemption limit by a small margin. This proposal will benefit more than six lakhs of
income-tax payers.
 65. Honourable Members will recall that the rates of income-tax on the personal
incomes were reduced in 1974 on the basis of a recommendation of the Direct Taxes
Enquiry Committee and this process was taken one step further in 1976 when these
rates were again lowered. The reduction in rates had largely fulfiled the expectation
that it would lead to better tax compliance. Unfortunately, the movement in this direction
was reversed under the Janata Government and the rates of income-tax were increased
in stages. I am of the view that the position in this regard should be set right. I
accordingly propose to reduce the surcharge on personal incomes in the case of all
categories of non-corporate taxpayers from 20 per cent to 10 per cent. This will not
only bring down the maximum marginal rate of tax from 72 per cent to 66 per cent but
w111 benefit taxpayers in all slabs of income.
 66. In view of the somewhat steep rise in prices of assets, I also propose to
raise the exemption limit for wealth-tax from Rs.1 lakh to Rs.1.5 lakhs with effect
from the current assessment year. In cases where the taxable wealth exceeds this
limit, the tax burden will, however, be retained at existing levels, subject to the usual
marginal relief.
 67. Government hopes that these concessions will provide the necessary
inducement to the vast majority of our taxpayers for correct declaration of their incomes
and wealth.
 68. I propose to counter some of the more commonly used devices for
tax avoidance.
 69. As Hon’ble Members are aware, the separate treatment accorded to Hindu
undivided family in tax laws has been widely used for avoidance of proper tax liability.
I accordingly propose to de-recognise partial partitions of Hindu undivided families
both for income and wealth taxation. Partial partitions made on or after lst January,
1979 will not be recognised for tax purposes and taxes will continue to be levied on
the basis that the existing Hindu undivided family had continued to remain joint.
 70. At present, Hindu undivided families having one or more members with
independent income exceeding the exemption limit are charged to income-tax at rates
which are somewhat higher than those applicable in the case of individuals. In order
 14

to further restrict the use of Hindu undivided family for the purposes of tax avoidance,
I propose to raise the rates of income-tax in the case of such Hindu undivided families.
The maximum marginal rate of 66 per cent will now apply on the slab of income over
Rs.50,000 and the rates on some of the lower slabs will also be raised to somewhat
higher levels. With these two changes in regard to tax treatment of Hindu undivided
families, I hope that the urge for forming multiple Hindu undivided families merely
for fragmentation of income and reduction of tax liability will be weakened.
 71. Honourable Members will recall that the Government had in 1970 taken
several measures to prevent the use of private discretionary trusts as a device for tax
avoidance. Experience, however, shows that these measures have not been fully effective
and the proliferation of such trusts has not been curbed to the desired extent. I, therefore,
propose to tighten the provisions in respect of private trusts. At present, discretionary
trusts are taxed at a flat rate of 65 per cent of their income and 1.5 per cent of their
wealth, or at the rates applicable in the case of individual, whichever is higher. Under
my proposal, such trusts will be charged to income-tax at the maximum marginal rate
and to wealth-tax at the flat rate of 3 per cent or at the appropriate rate applicable in
the case of an individual, whichever is higher. I also propose to make several other
provisions in relation to taxation of ‘private trusts with a view to plugging some
loopholes which have come to the notice of Government. All these provisions will
take effect from the current assessment year.
 72. Charitable and religious trusts are sometimes used for acquiring or
maintaining control over business or industry for private ends. In 1975, we had laid
down a pattern for investment of funds of charitable or religious trusts if they were
to continue to enjoy the tax exemption. With a view to enabling such trusts to change
over to the new pattern of investment in a smooth and gradual manner, the law
provided that the new pattern may be adopted before 1st April, 1978. This date was
subsequently extended to 1st April, 1981. Such trusts have, therefore, been given
ample time to adjust to the new policy. I want to put them m notice that this time
limit will not be extended.
 73. Our tax laws have always sought to encourage long-term savings through
life insurance, provident funds and other similar instruments. Unfortunately, the efficacy
of the provisions for encouraging savings was impaired last year when the incentives
for savings were drastically reduced. Honourable Members should be glad to know
that I propose to restore incentives for such savings to the pre-1979 budget levels. The
taxpayers will thus be entitled to 100 per cent deduction in respect of the first five
thousand rupees of the qualifying savings, 50 per cent in respect of the next five
thousand rupees and 40 per cent of the balance.
 74. As a further measure for promoting savings in the household sector, I
propose to give an option to income-tax payers to retain moneys in their Compulsory
Deposit Accounts beyond the due dates on payment of interest at the existing rate

 15

applicable to such deposits. Further, I propose to liberalise the tax exemption in respect
of interest on balances with recognised provident funds. At present, interest on such
funds is exempt from income-tax to the extent it does not exceed one-third of the
salary income of the employee. I propose to remove this ceiling limit.
 75. It is essential to promote new investment in industry. At the same time,
the fiscal system should not lead to a bias in favour of capital-intensive techniques.
Keeping these twin objectives in view, I propose to continue the tax holiday in respect
of new industrial undertakings, ships and hotels, but in a modified form. Under my
proposal, tax holiday will be available in respect of new industrial undertakings, ships
or approved hotels with reference to a specified percentage of the income derived
from these sources. In the case of companies, 25 per cent of the profits derived from
these sources will be exempt for a period of seven years. In the case of non-corporate
taxpayers, the percentage of exempted profits will be 20 per cent. In the case of
co-operative societies, the tax holiday will be available for a period of ten years as
against seven years in the case of other categories of taxpayers. This concession will
be available in the case of all small-scale industrial undertakings which go into
production after 31st March, 1981 but before 1st Apr11,1985, that is, till the end of
the new Five-Year Plan period. For other industrial undertakings, the concession will
apply only where they do not produce articles or things listed in the Eleventh Schedule
to the income-tax Act. The concession will also be available in the case of approved
hotels which start functioning or new ships which are acquired during that period.
 76. It is necessary to encourage new investment particularly in view of
shortages in several key sectors of the economy. As a special stimulus for new
investment, I propose to allow, in the year of installation, an additional depreciation in
an amount equal to 50 per cent of the normal depreciation on new machinery or plant
installed during the new Plan period. The proposed additional depreciation will not be
admissible in respect of ships, aircraft, road transport vehicles, office appliances or
machinery or plant installed in office premises or residential accommodation.
 77. There is a widespread feeling of frustration among the scientific community.
This Government is keenly aware of the contribution which our scientists and
technologists can make to the economic regeneration of India and is determined to
promote research and development activities in a big way. I, therefore, propose to
allow a weighted deduction in an amount equal to 125 per cent of the actual expenditure
incurred on scientific research in any in-house R & D facility where such expenditure
is incurred on a programme approved by the prescribed authority having regard to the
social, economic and industrial needs of India. in addition, I propose to extend the
scope of the existing provision for a weighted deduction on the expenditure incurred
on scientific research under sponsored programmes in approved laboratories so as to
cover the expenditure similarly incurred in in-house R & D facilities of public sector
companies. I have no doubt that the Honourable Members will welcome these
concessions.
 16

 78. At present, income-tax payers are required to pay advance tax during the
financial year on the basis of their own statements or estimates. Where the estimated
advance tax is likely to fall short of the tax on current income by more than 33-1/3 per
cent of the estimate, the taxpayers are required to make an upward revision of the
estimates. I propose to reduce this margin from 33-1/3 per cent to 20 per cent in the
case of companies. There will be no change for other taxpayers. This change will
enable us to realise a larger share of the tax due as advance tax and thus have a
favourable impact on Government’s ways and means position in 1980-81.
 79. In order to encourage the employment of blind and handicapped persons
in business and industry, I propose to provide for a weighted deduction of one and
one-third times the salary paid to such persons by employers where such salary does
not exceed twenty thousand rupees in a year. Further. I propose to enhance the deduction
currently available in computing the taxable income of blind and handicapped persons
from five thousands rupees to ten thousand rupees.
 80. At present, standard deduction in computing the salary income is not
available in the case of pensioners. With a view to affording some relief to pensioners
who are amongst the worst hit by the rise in prices, I propose to extend the benefit of
standard deduction in their case as well.
 81. In order to encourage our sportsmen to compete in international events, I
propose to allow a deduction equal to 25 per cent of their foreign earnings if these are
brought into India in foreign exchange. This provision will apply in relation to the
current assessment year and onwards. I also propose to allow higher deduction in
respect of savings made by sportsmen through life insurance and provident funds, etc.
as currently available in the case of authors, playwrights, artists, musicians and actors.
Sportsmen will thus be entitled to deduct contributions made to life insurance and
provident funds up to 40 per cent of their professional income and 30 per cent of the
remaining income, subject to a maximum of Rs.50,000.
 82. In 1978, certain restrictions were placed on the deductible amount of
expenditure on advertisement, publicity and sales promotion. These restrictions have
particularly hurt small and medium business. I, therefore, propose to do away with
these restrictions.
 83. At present, income from poultry and dairy farming and livestock breeding
is exempt from income-tax upto 33-1/3 per cent of such income or ten thousand
rupees, whichever is higher. I feel that time has come when persons deriving income
from these sources should also contribute a little more to the national exchequer. I
accordingly propose to restrict the deduction in respect of such income to one-third of
such income or fifteen thousand rupees, whichever is less.
 84. At present, agricultural property is included in the taxable wealth for the
purposes of the levy of wealth-tax. At the time when agricultural property was brought
 17

within the tax net, it was hoped that it would be a potent instrument for mobilising
resources from the affluent section of agriculturists. But our experience of over the
last decade has been most disappointing. The amount realised as wealth-tax on
agricultural property has generally been less than Rs.1 crore per annum. The valuation
of agricultural land has posed difficulties leading to complaints of harassment. As this
tax has clearly failed to achieve its original objective, I propose to discontinue the
levy of Wealth-tax on agricultural property except in the case of owners of tea, coffee,
rubber and cardamom plantations. I am sure that this measure will be widely welcomed
by our farmers.
 85. I also propose to make certain amendments in the income-tax Act to
counteract certain court decisions which have resulted in unintended benefit to
taxpayers. The Finance Bill further contains certain proposals for the amendment of
direct taxes which are of minor significance. I will not take the valuable time of the
House in explaining the same.
 86. The reduction in rates and other concessions in respect of direct taxes
should ordinarily involve loss of revenue. However, I am of the view that reduction in
rates will lead to significantly improved compliance with tax laws. The legislative
amendments made for countering tax avoidance devices and the changes in the
provisions in regard to advance tax should result in larger accretion of revenue. On a
broad judgement of the overall impact of all the proposals relating to income-tax avid
wealth-tax, I am not assuming any loss of revenue. I recognise, however, that there
may be need for some adjustment in the inter-se shares of Centre and States under
income-tax. Such adjustments will be made in the course of the year in the light of
trends in collections.
 87. An upward adjustment of lending rates should moderate the inflationary,
pressures in the economy. I accordingly propose to revive interest-tax in relation to
interest earned by scheduled commercial banks after 30th June, 1980. The scope of
the levy is being extended to cover also interest received by the larger all-India industrial
finance institutions, namely, IDBI, ICICI, IFCI and IRCI. The tax will be levied at the
rate of 7 per cent m the chargeable amount of interest as in the past. This measure will
yield Rs.217 crores in a full year and about Rs.108.5 crores in the year 1980-81.
 88. With a view to checking lavish expenditure incurred on accommodation
and entertainment in luxury hotels, I propose to introduce a Bill in the current session
to levy a new tax at 15 per cent on gross receipts of hotels in which the minimum
tariff for a single room is 75 rupees per day. The new levy is proposed to be made
effective from lst September, 1980. This will yield about Rs.12 crores in a full year
and the revenue during 1980-81 will be of the order of Rs.5 crores.
 89. I shall now turn to my proposals on indirect taxes. In framing my proposals
I have kept in view the following objectives. To the extent additional resource
mobilization is inescapable, this should be done in such a way as not to enhance the
 18

burden on any commodity significantly. Subject to this consideration, the small scale
segment of our industry should be encouraged. Industries with significant employment
and export potential should be provided encouragement through suitable adjustment
of duty structure. The duty burden on some articles of common consumption should
be reduced or totally removed.
 90. At the outset I would like to put the Honourable Members at ease by
pointing out that my proposals are modest. I have tried to avoid the usual device of
picking out selected items for new or increased levies ht relatively high rates.
 91. For this year, I have sought to spread the effect of the additional taxation
thinly on a wide range of products, taking care to leave out articles of common
consumption. I propose to achieve this objective through the special excise duty which
is even now leviable on all excisable goods at 1/20th of the basic excise duty, but from
which a number of commodities have been exempted. Under my proposal, the special
excise duty will be levied on those items which are at present, exempt from the levy,
at the rate of 1/20th of the effective basic excise duty rates applicable. Certain
commodities will, however, continue to be totally exempt from the levy. Thus there
will be no special duty on motor spirit including naphtha, kerosene, high speed diesel
oil, light diesel oil and liquefied petroleum gas or on coal or electricity. Again, the
special excise duty will not be levied on matches, or on vanspati, or on goods falling
under Tariff Item 68. Where special excise is already leviable at 1/20th of the effective
basic duty, I propose to increase this to 1/10th of the effective basic duty. This increase
will not, however, apply to furnace oil, asphalt, bitumen and tar, petroleum products
not otherwise specified and calcined petroleum coke. Sugar and processed vegetable
non-essential oils will also not be subjected to the increased levy. Cigarettes, which
are at present totally exempt from special excise duty will be subjected to special
excise duty at 1/10th of the basic excise duty rates. These proposals would yield a
revenue of Rs.197.71 crores in a full year. The impact of these proposals relating to
special excise duties will also yield a sum of Rs.16.75 crores in the shape of
countervailing duties on imported goods.
 92. Soda ash and caustic soda command a sizable premium in the market on
account of persistent shortages. I propose to mop up a part of this premium by raising
excise duty on these products from 10 per cent to 15 per cent ad valorem. I also
propose to increase the excise duty on starch from 10 per cent to 15 per cent ad
valorem. This step will bring these chemical products on a par with other chemicals
products which, in general, bear excise duty at 15 per cent ad valorem. Synthetic
rubber at present bears duty at the very low level of 5 per cent ad valorem. As a
revenue measure, I propose to raise the excise duty on synthetic rubber from 5 per
cent to 10 per cent ad valorem. Similarly, the rate of excise duty on specified acids is
being raised from 10% to 15% ad valorem. These measures would fetch in a full year,
additional revenue of Rs.18.93 crores.
 93. On revenue considerations, I propose to subject molasses to a specific
 19

duty of Rs.30 per metric tonne under a separate Item in the Central Excise Tariff
instead of 8 per cent under Item 68 of the Central Excise Tariff at present. The levy is,
however, proposed to be restricted to molasses produced in vacuum Dan sugar factories.
Molasses produced in khandsari sugar units, which goes inter-alia for edible purposes,
is proposed to be exempted. The revenue yield as a result of this proposal is estimated
to be Rs.4.24 crores in a year.
 94. I now come to proposals which are designed to provide a higher degree of
protection to certain sectors of indigenous industry. The first proposal relates to audio
frequency amplifiers, an item reserved for the small scale sector. In view of the adverse
effect of imports of this item, I propose to increase the customs duty on imports from
75 per cent to 120 per cent ad valorem. My other proposal relates to imported unexposed
colour positive cinematograph films in respect of which the basic customs duty is
proposed to be raised from 50 paise to Rs.1/- per linear metre to enable the indigenous
public sector unit to withstand competition from imports. I also propose to increase
the countervailing duty on imported computers from 10 per cent to 20 per cent ad
valorem as a measure of affording protection to the indigenous computer industry.
These measures are designed to yield additional revenue of about Rs.1.83 crores in a
full year.
 95. I have only one more revenue proposal in the field of indirect taxes. This
relates to passengers’ baggage. As Hon’ble Members are aware, baggage allowances
were substantially liberalised in 1978 and, for the generality of Indian passengers
going abroad for short visits, the allowances consist of Rs.1,000 worth of duty-free
goods and Rs.2,000 worth of goods on payment of duty. Despite this liberalisation,
goods in the nature of baggage continue to be imported by many passengers in quantities
substantially higher than the permissible limits. This is mainly due to the prevailing
craze for foreign goods and the high margin of profit on the sale of these goods in
India. Such cases of import of baggage Items in excess of the permissible limits
necessitate initiation of adjudication proceedings which generally have the effect of
slowing down the tempo of passenger clearance in our international airports. I have
given thought to this problem and I am making two proposals in this regard. The first
is a pure revenue measure of increasing the effective rata-of duty on baggage articles
in excess of the free allowances from 120 per cent ad valorem to 150 per cent ad
valorem. This measure is to come into force immediately and is expected to yield an
additional Rs.2 crores in a full year. The second measure to be brought into force
shortly, provides for the levy of duty at a flat rate of 320 per cent on baggage imported
in excess of the- permissible limits, that is, in excess of what can be passed free or on
a duty of 150 per cent. At present, such articles would be treated as unlicensed imports,
resulting in confiscations, fines and penalties designed to wipe out any profit on their
sale. The increased rate of duty is intended to replace these fines and penalties, without
having to go through the time-consuming process of adjudication. Goods which are
obviously in the nature of trade goods will, however, still attract penal action.
 20

 96. I have a few other proposals which are essentially in the nature of
rationalisation measures. The first one relates to aerated waters. In the interest of
simplification. It is proposed to do away with the existing distinction between aerated
waters containing caffeine and those not containing caffeine for the purpose of excise
duty. Instead, it is proposed to levy on all flavoured aerated waters a uniform duty at
40 per cent ad valorem. The revenue effect of the proposal is expected to be negligible.
 97. I have given considerable thought to the problems thrown up as a result of
the changes made in the 1979 Budget in the excise duty structure applicable to the
match industry. While the duty advantage enjoyed by the cottage sector obviously
needs to be maintained, the non-mechanised middle sector should not be allowed to
make inroads into the cottage sector. In order to ensure that the benefit of the lower
rate of duty accrues only to the genuine cottage sector units, I propose to confine the
duty concession to match boxes bearing approved labels and sold to or marketed
through the KVIC, State Agencies and registered cooperative societies. At the same
time, I do not find justification for the continuance of the existing limits placed on the
clearances of matches by the cottage sector at the concessional rate of duty. I, therefore,
propose to abolish the existing limit on production by the cottage sector units. I am
confident that this package of measures will result in accelerated growth of the cottage
sector of the match industry.
 98. There have been complaints of malpractices in the biri industry by
manufacturers who have been taking advantage of the liberal exemption limit applicable
to the unbranded sector which is at present 60 lakhs of biris per manufacturer per year.
With a view to reducing the possibilities of malpractices, I propose to lower this
exemption limit to 30 lakhs of unbranded biris per manufacturer per year, which will
still leave out of the excise net the really small manufacturer and the self employed
manufacturer. This is not designed as a revenue measure.
 99. Some of the provisions in the Finance Bill are aimed at rationalisation
or clearer definition of certain central excise tariff items to remove doubts or
difficulties which have come to notice. The details of these measures may be found
in the Budget papers.
 100. I shall now turn to concessions in the area of indirect taxes. The small
manufacturer plays a significant role in our economy. I would like to improve his
competitive position vis-a-vis the large manufacturer and thus widen the entrepreneurial
base of our economy. Only in this way can we check concentration of economic
power. There is already a scheme of excise duty concessions applicable to manufacturers
of 70 excisable commodities, under which clearances upto Rs.5 lakhs in value in a
year have been exempted from duty. I now propose to liberalise this concession in two
respects. First I propose to include two more groups of commodities under the scheme.
These are chemicals, namely, sodium bichromate, bleaching powder, calcium carbide
and artificial and synthetic resins and plastic material. Besides, the coverage is being

 21

widened in respect of paper and paper boards. But the second and important concession
which I propose to introduce is that in respect of all the commodities covered by the
scheme, clearances between Rs.5 lakhs and Rs.15 lakhs will bear only three-fourths of
the applicable rate of excise duty as against the normal duty at present. This measure
should benefit a large number of small manufacturers. The revenue sacrifice will be of
the order of Rs.6.50 crores in a full year.
 101. Last year’s Budget made a change which affected a substantial number of
small manufacturers of goods falling under the residuary Item 68 of the Central Excise
Tariff. Honourable Members will recall that the quantum of duty-free clearances was
reduced from Rs.30 lakhs to Rs.15 lakhs. I had opposed this change then. As a measure
of undoing the hardship caused to such small manufacturers, I propose to provide for
complete exemption from duty for clearances upto Rs.30 lakhs per annum. In other
words, small manufacturers of goods falling under Item 68 of the Central Excise
Tariff, whose capital investment on plant and machinery does not exceed Rs.10 lakhs,
will be eligible for complete exemption from duty on their first clearances of goods
upto Rs.30 lakhs in a financial year provided their clearances during the preceding
financial year did not exceed Rs.30 lakhs. For the remaining part of the current financial
year, the quantum of clearances eligible for full exemption from duty will be fixed at
a correspondingly lower figure. This concession is expected to cost Rs.2.4 crores in a
full year.
 102. Paper and allied products are in short supply in the country and new
investment in this sector has not been readily forthcoming. Much can be done by
smaller units to help in filling the production gap. To encourage them, I propose to
extend a concessional rate of duty of 20 per cent ad valorem as against the present rate
of 30 per cent, to paper and paper board produced by small manufacturers whose
clearances in the preceding financial year did not exceed 300 tonnes of paper and
paper board. This concession will cost a little less than Rs.1 crore in a full year.
 103. The electronics industry has considerable employment and export potential.
We have the necessary skills and expertise and these should be harnessed through
appropriate fiscal incentives for development of the electronics industry in a big way.
This is a field which offers great scope to small scale manufacturers. I am, therefore,
proposing some duty concessions in respect of the industry. There will be a reduction
in customs duty on specified items of capital goods such as machines and instruments
required by the electronics industry and not produced within the country. The customs
duty on such items will be reduced from the present levels of duty (which in some
cases are as high as 89% ad valorem) to a total of 25% ad valorem. Similarly, I also
propose to reduce the customs duty on specified raw materials and components required
for the electronics industry from their present levels (which in some cases are higher
than 200% ad valorem) to 45,9 ad valorem plus countervailing duty where an excise
duty is leviable under Item 68. These two concessions will cost the exchequer Rs.4.7
crores in a full year.
 22

 104. The experience of other countries shows that the growth of consumer
electronics facilitates in due course the development of other sophisticated lines of
production in electronics. Television is a powerful medium of communication and
education. With a view to enabling a. large number of people to get the benefit of this
medium, I propose to reduce the excise duty on cheaper priced T.V. sets from 15% ad
valorem to 10% ad valorem, and to effect a corresponding reduction in the duty on
other T.V. sets from 30% to 25% ad valorem. These concessions would entail a revenue
sacrifice of Rs.1.5 crores in a year.
 105. Radio is an equally powerful instrument of education and entertainment
and is more widely in use. Government considers that single and two band radio sets
should be popularised in rural areas. The licence fee m such sets has proved to be
irksome and inhibits purchase of radio sets by the rural folk. It is, therefore, proposed
to abolish the fee in respect of single and two band radio sets including transistor sets.
This measure, which I am sure will be widely welcomed, will cost Government about
Rs.4 crores.
 106. Our computer industry is still in its infancy, compared with those of other
countries. In order to provide an additional incentive for indigenous production and
improvement, I propose to reduce the excise duty m indigenously manufactured
computers from 25% to 20% ad valorem.
 107. Ship building is a high priority industry and has an important part to play
in promoting economic self reliance. The Indian ship building industry is finding It
increasingly difficult to face competition from foreign shipyards. I, therefore, propose
to extend full exemption from excise duty to ocean going vessels built in Indian
shipyards. This relief would cost about Rs.5 crores in the current financial year.
 108. Honourable Members would be aware that Government has been following
the practice of bringing down the import duty on selected machinery items having no
indigenous angle to 25 per cent ad valorem as a measure of reducing capital costs in
industries. Carrying this process further, I propose, this year, to reduce the import duty
to 25 per cent ad valorem on twelve more items of capital equipment. These include
five Items of machinery used in the printing industry, such as High speed Letter press
rotary and off-set rotary printing machines, Mono/Lino Type Casting machines, etc.
These concessions would entail a revenue sacrifice of Rs.1.84 crores in a full year.
 109. The cost of high pressure gas cylinders constitutes a significant portion of
the total capital outlay required by the Gas industry. With a view to reducing, at least
in part, this capital outlay, I propose to extend complete exemption from customs duty
on steel tubes imported for fabrication of high pressure gas cylinders. I also propose
to reduce the excise duty m such cylinders from the existing level of 15 per cent, to 8
per cent ad valorem. which is the duty level applicable under Item 68. These two
measures, taken together, are estimated to cost Rs.1.89 crores in a full year.
 23

 110. I have a proposal of general application, which is intended to facilitate
manufacturers of excisable goods, using inputs on which excise duty is leviable. In
order to give relief in such cases, two procedures are in vogue at present. One is what
is called the set-off procedure The other is the proforma credit procedure under rule
56A of the Central Excise Rules. The proforma credit procedure is generally recognised
to be more beneficial and less Irksome to the manufacturers. I, therefore, propose to
replace the existing concessions based on the set-off procedure by similar concessions
based on the proforma credit procedure. I am sure that this measure will be welcomed
by the industry.
 111. It is a little painful for me to remind Honourable Members that last year’s
budget had increased excise duty m a number of articles of common consumption to
a significant extent. I propose to reverse this trend. Thus -
 - Specified life-saving drugs, 30 in number, will be fully exempted from
excise duty. The list will be kept under periodical review with a view to adding more
items as may be warranted;
 - Controlled cloth is meant for the weaker sections of society and its cost
should be as low as possible. I, therefore, propose to exempt controlled cloth from
excise duty.
 - Cotton and Cotton-viscose blend hosiery consisting of Items like banians
are of relatively low value and these are now subject to excise duty at 8 per cent. I
propose to exempt them fully from excise duty.
 - Cycles are the poor man’s conveyance. I, therefore, propose to totally
exempt cycles and cycle parts falling under Item 68 from excise duty.
 - Sewing machines, which are indispensable to the housewife and also enable
the weaker sections to earn a living, will also be fully exempted from excise duty.
 - Pressure cookers which take the drudgery out of the house wife’s daily
tasks and save fuel now attract duty at 15 per cent. I propose to reduce it to 10 per
cent.
 112. I also propose to make substantial reductions in excise duty m some other
Items of everyday use.
 Accordingly-
 - Excise duty on cheaper varieties of toilet soap will be reduced from 10
per cent to 5 per cent;
 - Excise duty on tooth paste will be reduced from 20 per cent to 10
per cent;
 - Vacuum and gas-filled bulbs not exceeding 60 watts will have the duty
reduced from 15 per cent to 10 per cent.

 24

 113. I am sure these substantial concessions, which would cost the exchequer
approximately Rs.15 crores in a full year, will be welcomed by Parliament and by the
public. I also hope that industry and trade will play fair by the consumer and pass on
the benefit of these duty reductions to the consumer.
 114. Our Party’s election manifesto has referred to the need to encourage
dieselisation of taxis. In fulfilment of this commitment and with a view to giving an
incentive for taxi-owners to go in for dieselisation, I propose to extend full excise
duty exemption to diesel engines used for conversion of petrol driven taxis.
 115. My second proposal is aimed at giving relief to the cycle rickshaw driver.
Powered cycle rickshaws are already exempt from excise duty. To encourage
motorisation of non-powered cycle rickshaws. I propose to extend full duty exemption
for internal combustion engines used for this purpose. I am sure Honourable Members
will welcome this measure, as a visible sign of our keenness to reduce physical strain
and at the same time encourage this relatively cheap means of transport.
 116. Before I leave the field of indirect taxes, I have a major declaim of policy
to announce. For the past couple of decades, there has been a persistent public demand
for the setting up of an independent Appellate Tribunal for customs and central excise
matters, somewhat similar to the set-up on the Direct Taxes side. This demand has
recently been endorsed by the Estimates Committee of Parliament. Government has,
in the past, not been in favour of such a system, as it was felt that it would not be
appropriate in the case of indirect taxes, and that the present departmental machinery
was in fact adopting an objective approach. I think a time has come when we should
gracefully accept the common view, which is based m the dictum that justice should
not only be done but should also seem to be done. It is in this spirit that provision has
been made in the Finance Bill for setting up an Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals in
respect of customs, central excise and gold control matters. This Tribunal will be
independent of the executive machinery charged with the responsibility of day-to-day
administration of revenue laws. I have no doubt that this measure will meet with the
whole-hearted approval of Parliament and of trade and industry.
 117. My taxation proposals will yield a sum of Rs.223. 22 crores in a full year
in central excise duties and Ra.39.58 crores in customs duties. The reliefs I have
announced add up to Rs.34.75 crores m the central excise side and Ra.7.93 crores m
the customs side. The net yield is, therefore, Rs.188.47 crores from Central excise
duties and Rs.31.65 crores from customs duties. The accrual to the Central exchequer
in a full year will be Rs.144.85 crores and the share of the States will be Rs.75.27
crores.
 118. Where changes are proposed to be made by notifications, effective from
the 19th June,1980, copies of such notifications will be laid on the Table of the House
in due course.

 25

 119. I wish to say now a few words on behalf of my honourable colleague, the
Minister of Communications. Payment of dearness allowance and sanction of bonus
linked to productivity to the staff of the Posts and Telegraphs Department have increased
the working expenses of the Department. It has, therefore, become necessary,-to increase
the tariffs on a few selected services. In making tariff revision proposals, Government
has carefully avoided revision of charges for such services as are generally used by
the common man. There will be no increase in the price of post cards and inland
letters. The tariff for letters is, however, being increased from 30 paise to 35 paise at
the lowest slab. The rate for parcels will be stepped up from Rs.1.50 to Rs.2.00 for
every 500 grams. The charges for installation and shifting of telephone connections
are also being increased. Local calls beyond 5,000 cans in a quarter will be charged at
50 paise per call as against 40 paise at present. A memorandum showing the proposed
tariffs is being circulated along with Budget papers. It will be seen that the charges for
the bulk of postal and tele-communications services have been left untouched. The
changes would take effect from a date to be notified after the Finance Bill is passed
by Parliament. The proposed tariff revisions are estimated to bring in an additional
revenue of Rs.27.10 crores per annum. The additional revenue during the year 1980-81
would be of the order of Rs.13 crores and has been taken into account in estimating
the revenues of the Posts and Telegraphs.
 120. The tax effort net of reliefs proposed in the Budget will m the whole bring
in about Rs.282 crores for the current year, of which Rs.223 crores will accrue to the
Centre. There will be a residual deficit of Rs.1417 crores which I propose to leave
uncovered. This deficit is only a little over half the deficit of last year. It is my
judgement that a deficit of this order will not have a significantly adverse impact m
the economy. If the monsoon turns out to be normal and if we continue the sound,
economic policies already initiated, there is every hope that there will be an appreciable
improvement in agriculture and industrial production resulting in a significant growth
of GNP. We shall also pursue a responsible monetary policy so that expansion of bank
credit for unproductive or speculative purposes is held in check.
 121. Sir, within the constraints imposed by the difficult economic situation
inherited by the present Government, I have endeavoured my best to provide relief to
those who deserve it most. But since reliefs can only be palliatives and the real need
of a poor society is growth, I have tried to impart a judicious stimulus to investment.
With the higher levels of investment, in the public sector as well as the private sector,
and its particular sectoral distribution, both production and employment should register
a substantial increase. This Government has a special responsibility towards the weaker
sections of society who have so enthusiastically supported it. The Budget seeks to
protect them through special programmes designed to promote their wen being. It is
also our firm resolve that no matter how difficult the economic situation is, the minimum
basic needs of consumption of the poorer sections and the middle classes will be met
 26

through a reinvigorated public distribution system. With a strong and cohesive
Government it should be possible to utilise fully the existing production potential.
 122. My Budget represents a modest contribution to the process of restoring
the country’s economy to the path of stability, growth and social justice. Its success,
however, depends upon the cooperation of all people who work in the fields or factories,
power stations or ports, railways or coal mines. The people of this country have high
hopes about the ability of the present Government to achieve these goals and I am sure
will be prepared to give their whole hearted support in this task. It should be the
common endeavour of all of us, rising above partisan prejudices and passions to
harness the people’s enthusiasm for the tasks of development.
 (June 18, 1980)




 27

