 PART B
 5 7 . While presenting the budget last year, I drew attention to the need for a
comprehensive reform of both the direct and indirect tax system and had explained
that lack of time had made it difficult to do as much as I would have liked in this
regard. Subsequently, the Government set up a Tax Reforms Committee under the
Chairmanship of Dr. Raja J. Chelliah. The Committee has since submitted its
Interim Report. The Report distills the wisdom of some of our most distinguished
experts on the complex subject of reform of both direct and indirect taxes and I
have drawn heavily upon it in framing my Budget proposals. The summary of
recommendations contained in the Report is separately being placed in Parliament
to enable fuller appreciation of the analysis of the Committee and the rationale for
its recommendations.
 5 8 . There is a consensus among fiscal experts, based on experience gained all
over the world, that a moderately progressive tax structure combined with strong
enforcement is the best way of encouraging honesty and voluntary tax compliance.
The Chelliah Committee has endorsed this view and has recommended that our
direct tax system would be more effective if the income tax regime had lower rates
of taxation, with a narrower spread between the entry rate and the maximum
marginal rate, and a minimum of tax incentives. I agree with this assessment and
I propose to restructure the personal income tax in the following manner. I propose
to enhance the exemption limit for income tax levy from Rs.22,000 at present to
Rs.28,000. This will provide substantial relief to the taxpayers in the lower income
group and I am sure it will be welcomed by the Honourable Members, many of
whom had urged such an adjustment even last year. I hope this will convince them
that I am an attentive and sensitive listener to what goes on in this august House.
I further propose that there will only be three tax rate slabs, with the entry rate of
20 per cent. applicable upto Rs. 50,000, a middle slab of 30 per cent. upto
Rs.1,00,000 and a maximum rate of 40 per cent. above Rs.1 lakh. A corresponding
revision is also being made in the case of specified Hindu undivided families. Because
of the severe resource constraints, I am compelled to retain the surcharge at 12 per
cent. for one more year; but this will be payable only by those whose income
exceeds rupees one lakh.
 5 9 . With the reduction in tax rates, a number of tax exemptions, which
conferred large benefits on higher income tax payers are no longer justified. I,
therefore, propose to abolish the deductions under sections 80L, 80CCA and 80CCB

 14
of the Income-tax Act. The computation of income from house property is also
being rationalised in respect of certain deductions presently being allowed. The
provision under section 88, which provides for tax rebate in respect of specified
savings such as Life Insurance, Provident funds etc. will however continue, as
these are normally availed of by fixed salary earners. In fact, I propose to widen its
scope by including within its purview contributions to Pension Funds set up by the
National Housing Bank and by Mutual Funds. I am also providing that those who
wish to continue contributing to the savings schemes which until now qualified for
deduction under section 80CCA and 80CCB, can get tax rebate under Section 88
of the Income-tax Act.
 6 0 . It is said that the child is the father of man, but some of our taxpayers
have converted children into tax shelters for their fathers. The tax law provides for
clubbing of income from gifts given by parents but this does not apply to other
income, including income from other gifted assets, and the practice of cross gifting
is widely used to evade clubbing. The Chelliah Committee has recommended that
in order to plug this loophole, which accounts for a substantial leakage of revenue,
the income of a minor child should be clubbed with that of the parent. There is
merit in this suggestion and I propose to accept it. Recognising however the existence
of a number of child prodigies, especially child artistes in our country, I propose to
exclude their professional income, as also any wage income of minors, from the
purview of such clubbing. The practice of clubbing the income of minor children
with that of the parent for tax purposes is in vogue in a number of countries.
 6 1 . The revenue loss on account of the restructuring of income-tax rates as
traditionally estimated will be Rs.1500 crores. However, this will be offset by the
proposed abridgement in the concessions and tax exemptions and the change in
the tax treatment of minor ’s income. If, as I expect, lower tax rates will lead to
better tax compliance, there will be a net revenue gain even though it is not possible
to quantify it. If tax-payers cooperate with me and revenue earnings go up
significantly, I propose to reward the tax-payers with a further cut in income tax
rates. The ball is now in their court.
 6 2 . In a country with a population of over 800 million, hardly 7 million persons
pay income and corporate tax. It is therefore necessary to attract new taxpayers
into the tax net. With this end in view, I propose to introduce a presumptive tax
system in respect of shop keepers and other retail traders with an annual turnover
below Rs. 5 lakhs. In order to enable them to avoid the difficulty of maintaining
detailed account books, filing a complicated tax return and going through the
normal assessment procedure, a simplified scheme has been worked out under
which the taxpayer will give only brief particulars of his turnover and pay just
Rs.1400 as tax for that year. This should enable potential taxpayers in this category
to overcome their psychological hesitation of getting into the tax system. The scheme
is being introduced on a purely optional basis and is intended only for those who
may have taxable income and wish to avail of this simplified procedure. With the
increase in the exemption limit to Rs.28,000, those with a turnover of less than Rs.
2.5 lakhs to Rs.3 lakhs may well find that they do not have to pay this presumptive
tax.
 6 3 . The present tax treatment of long term capital gains has been criticised
on the ground that the deduction allowed in computing taxable gain is not related
to the period of time for which the asset has been held. It does not take into

 15
account the inflation that may have occurred over time. The Chelliah Committee
has suggested a system of indexation to take care of the problem and I propose to
accept its recommendation. Taxable capital gains will be computed by allowing the
cost of the asset to be adjusted for general inflation before deducting from the sale
proceeds. The adjustment factor for each year will be notified by the Central
Government. The long term capital gains thus computed will be taxed at 20 per
cent. in the case of individuals and HUFs, 40 per cent. in the case of companies,
firms, associations of persons and bodies of individuals, and 30 per cent. in the
case of others. The new system will favour those whose capital gains accrue over a
longer period, while those making capital gains over a shorter period will pay a
higher tax. This is as it should be. The cut off date for valuation is also being
shifted from 1st April, 1974 to 1st April, 1981. With these changes, I propose to
withdraw the standard deduction in computing taxable capital gains and also the
exemptions under section 54E for capital gains invested in specified assets and
section 53 in respect of capital gains arising from sale of residential house.
 6 4 . 1While I am simplifying the income-tax structure, I should extend some
concessions directly to certain categories of taxpayers who deserve sympathetic
consideration from the Government.
 6 4 . 2Many individuals have to maintain handicapped dependants which often
imposes a heavy burden upon them and this is a burden which we should lighten
as much as we can. I therefore propose to increase the deduction available to such
persons from Rs.6,000 at present to Rs.12,000 per year. Further, the scope of this
tax concession is being made available to all taxpayers irrespective of their income.
 6 4 . 3Women who take up employment deserve special consideration and
encouragement. I, therefore, propose to increase the standard deduction from
Rs.12,000 to Rs.15,000 in the case of working women having total income upto
seventy five thousand rupees. I hope this will convince Honourable lady members
of this House about my commitment to the cause of social and economic uplift of
Indian women. The only quid pro quo I expect from them is to defend the budget
regardless of their party affiliations.
 6 4 . 4Taking note of the financial difficulties often encountered by persons in
old age and as a token of my regard for such senior citizens, I propose to give a tax
rebate of 10 per cent. on the net tax payable by persons who have completed 65
years of age and whose gross total income is below Rs.50,000.
 6 4 . 5Having regard to the fluctuating nature of income earned by authors,
playwrights, artists, musicians, actors and sportsmen and in recognition of their
contribution to the enrichment of the cultural life of the nation, the tax rebate for
them in respect of specified savings under section 88 of the Income-tax Act will be
increased from 20 per cent. to 25 per cent.
 6 4 . 6The victims of the Bhopal Gas Disaster are to get compensation on the
basis of the Supreme Court judgement. Having regard to the human dimensions of
the tragedy, I propose to exempt, in all cases, the compensation received by such
recipients from income tax liability.
 6 4 . 7I have received several representations for widening the scope of exempting
medical expenses for both salaried and self-employed persons. I propose to
substantially liberalise the provisions relating to hospitalisation and medical

 16
insurance. Tax benefits to salaried persons will no longer be limited to treatment in
a few government recognised hospitals only. Similarly, for self-employed persons,
the deduction available for medical insurance is being enhanced from Rs. 3,000 to
Rs. 6,000.
 6 4 . 8Exemption from income-tax is now available to the employees of the public
sector on payments made under the Voluntary Retirement Schemes. I propose to
extend the benefit of the exemption, subject to certain guidelines, to the employees
in the private sector as well.
 6 5 . There has been a long standing criticism that by subjecting the income of
both partnership firms as well as the partners to taxation, we are engaging in
double taxation. The Chelliah Committee has also stressed that double taxation in
this regard should be avoided. I agree that we should avoid double taxation and I
propose, as a measure of relief, to treat the firm as a separate tax entity and do
away with the taxation of the same income in the hands of partners. I propose to
allow deduction towards interest and salary payments made to partners from the
income of the firm and then tax the balance income in the hands of the firm at a
flat rate of 40 per cent.. The proportion of deduction allowed decreases with the
income level of the firm and is so designed that the total tax incidence on small
firms and professional firms will be reduced. The partners will not be taxed on
their share in the income of the firm though they will be liable to pay tax on salary
and interest income. This method will result in enormous simplification from the
point of view of taxpayers as well as tax administration as the proposed scheme will
do away with complexities, associated with the procedure relating to registration of
firms, rectification of partners’ assessments when firms’ assessments are revised,
etc.
 6 6 . Last year, I introduced provisions relating to tax deduction at source in
respect of interest on term deposits with banks and commission payments. There
has, however, been considerable criticism from taxpayers about the implementation
of these provisions. I have also received representations from a number of Members
of Parliament seeking withdrawal of these provisions. The system of tax deduction
at source is a useful tool and one of the well recognised methods of enforcing tax
compliance in many countries. However, a harassed Finance Minister has to be
sensitive to the opinions of Honourable members of Parliament even when they
differ from his own convictions. Therefore, I propose to withdraw these two provisions.
 6 7 . The Wealth-tax Act, 1957 has far too many exemptions making its
administration enormously complicated. The valuation of certain assets such as
shares also presents problems, since very high market values reflecting speculative
activity can lead to a heavy burden on shareholders who are long term investors.
There is also no distinction at present between productive and non-productive
assets. The Chelliah Committee has suggested that, in order to encourage the
taxpayers to invest in productive assets such as shares, securities, bonds, bank
deposits, etc. and also to promote investments through Mutual Funds, these financial
assets should be exempted from wealth tax. Wealth tax should be levied on
individuals, Hindu undivided families and all companies only in respect of non-
productive assets such as residential houses including farm houses and urban
land, jewelry, bullion, motor cars, planes, boats and yachts which are not used for
commercial purposes. The Committee has further suggested that such tax should
be at the rate of one per cent., with a basic exemption of Rs.15 lakhs. I propose to

 17

accept this recommendation and I hope this change will encourage investments in
productive assets and discourage investment in ostentatious non-productive wealth.
 6 8 . Earlier in my speech I have referred to the importance which the
Government attaches to the capital market and the special role of mutual funds
including private sector mutual funds. In order to treat all mutual funds alike in
tax matters, I propose to exempt from income tax mutual funds in both public
sector and private sector recognised by the Securities and Exchange Board of
India. I had also referred to the scheme permitting Indian Companies to issue
convertible bonds and equity to investors abroad. I propose to tax the income and
capital gains from these issues at a concessional rate of 10 per cent., as is applicable
to Offshore mutual funds. It is hoped that these measures will give a new thrust to
the capital market in the country.
 6 9 . Last year, I had extended expenditure tax to cover air-conditioned
restaurants in order to mop up additional resources. I have received several
representations that this provision falls heavily on innumerable restaurants and
small establishments which are patronised mainly by the middle class. It has been
suggested that air conditioning in restaurants, unlike in homes, is no longer a
luxury item of the rich. The largest number of such complaints have come from
Bombay. Having lived in Bombay for two and a half years, I have special regard for
the citizens of this great city. This has been reinforced by their voting behaviour in
the recent elections to the Municipal Corporation. I, therefore, feel a special obligation
to respond. I propose to withdraw this levy as far as the restaurants are concerned.
However, I have made certain changes in the scope of the Expenditure-tax Act
relating to hotel receipts. I propose to enhance the qualifying limit for liability
relating to room charges of the hotel from the present Rs.400 per day to Rs.1200
per day. In view of the exchange rate adjustments undertaken recently, there is no
longer any need for exempting expenditure made in foreign exchange from the tax.
I am, accordingly, withdrawing this exemption.
 70 . With a view to providing support to the cooperative sector, I propose to
exempt all cooperative societies including urban cooperative societies engaged in
the business of banking from the purview of Interest-tax Act.
 7 1 . I recognise the need for a reform of the corporate tax system. This is also
an area where rates of taxation need to be lowered and I would like to give advance
notice of my intention to begin lowering them as soon as possible. However, as the
detailed recommendations of the Chelliah Committee on corporate taxation are yet
to be received, I propose to defer major restructuring in this area until after I have
received its recommendations. Accordingly, for the present there will be no change
in the rate structure as well as the surcharge. In this budget, I propose to make
just two changes. Ordinarily, depreciation and investment allowance carried forward
from earlier years is set off against the current income. In line with the rationalisation
of depreciation allowance brought about last year, I propose that in respect of
assessment year 1992-93, the quantum of set off for carried forward depreciation
and investment allowance in the case of companies, where such amount exceeds
Rs.1,00,000, shall be limited to two-third of such amount and the remaining one-

 18
third will be allowed to be adjusted in the assessment year 1993-94. Further,
having regard to the widespread criticism that the Income-tax Act has artificial
ceilings in regard to certain business expenses, I am liberalising some of the items
on the basis of the recommendation of the Chelliah Committee.
 7 2 . Having regard to the complexities in tax laws, I have been receiving
representations that the Government should give Advance Rulings whenever a
taxpayer has doubts about the tax liability in respect of intended transactions. This
practice obtains in a number of countries. There are certain practical difficulties in
implementing such a suggestion. However, in the interest of avoiding needless
litigation and promoting better taxpayer relations, a scheme for giving Advance
Rulings in respect of transactions involving non-residents, is being worked out and
will be put into operation soon. The scope of this can be extended subsequently on
the basis of experience gained. The Government is also planning to set up the
National Court of Direct Taxes in order to ensure that litigation in direct tax matters
is settled expeditiously. Along with this, the Government would also like to bring
forward, as soon as possible, a Bill on Direct Taxes Code, integrating therein all the
three direct taxes so as to make the law easily understandable and tax administration
simple.
 7 3 . I do not propose to take up the time of the House with other minor changes
in the Direct Tax Laws.
 7 4 . My proposals on direct taxes are estimated to yield a net revenue gain of
Rs. 795 crores. Of this amount, Rs. 435 crores will accrue to the States.
 7 5 . I now turn to the proposals relating to indirect taxes.
 7 6 . A long standing complaint of our industry, and of experts in trade policy
is that our customs tariff rates are too high and increasingly out of line with the
trends in our competitor countries, all of whom have reduced tariffs to very moderate
levels. My colleague the Honourable Commerce Minister has repeatedly told me
that we cannot expect to compete with these countries in world markets if we
persist with high tariff rates which have the effect of creating a high cost industrial
structure. This is in line with the directions I had indicated in my budget speech
last year. The Chelliah Committee, which was asked to look into all aspects of
customs duties, has recommended reduction in the general level of tariffs, a reduction
in the dispersion of the tariff rates and a rationalisation of the system with abolition
of numerous end-use exemptions and concessions. The Committee has also rightly
suggested that the process of reform should be gradual, so as to moderate the
impact of the adjustment, both in terms of possible revenue loss and the pace at
which domestic industry is exposed to competition. I propose to act on these
recommendations by making a substantial start in this budget on reforming the
customs tariff structure.
 7 7 . Last year I had begun the process of reducing import duties by lowering
the ad valorem rates of basic plus auxiliary duties of customs to a maximum of
150%. I now propose to lower the peak tariff level further by reducing the basic
plus auxiliary rates of import duties (inclusive of specific duties) to a maximum of
110% with the exception of passenger baggage and alcoholic beverages. The loss of
revenue on account of this proposal as traditionally estimated is Rs. 1700 crores,
though I feel it could be much lower in practice.

 19
 7 8 . My next proposal relates to the duty on capital goods. The general duty on
capital goods, including project imports, is currently at 80% which is below the
peak rate of 110%. However, there is a good case for giving priority to reducing the
duty on capital goods because high duty on capital goods constitutes a permanent
increase in the cost of production for the life of the unit. In order to encourage new
investment in export oriented industries, we should move to a lower duty rate on
capital goods at an accelerated rate. I, therefore, propose to reduce the duty rate on
project imports and general machinery from 80% to 60%. In the case of capital
goods including project imports for electronics industry, I propose to reduce the
import duty from 60% to 50%. In relation to capital goods for projects of coal
mining and crude petroleum refining, I propose a deeper reduction in the import
duty prescribing a uniform rate of 30%. In the case of power projects, the present
concessional duty rate of 30% or 40% is being rationalised to a uniform rate of
30%. I also propose to reduce the import duty on other capital goods currently
attracting duty above 80% by 10 percentage points. The existing concession in the
duty rates available to the components of specified machinery enabling those items
to be imported at rates below the rate applicable to the machinery is proposed to
be continued. These changes will not adversely affect the competitive position of
the Indian capital goods industry especially in view of the exchange rate adjustment
effected last year. These proposals involve a loss of revenue of about Rs.840 crores.
 7 9 . In view of the reduction of tariff peaks, I have also taken the opportunity
to remove some of the end-use notifications for concessional duty imports. In this
process of rationalisation, some duties may go up marginally. However, in view of
the overall reduction of duty rates, industry should be able to absorb such marginal
increases.
 8 0 . In my last budget I had proposed certain rationalisation of the rates of
auxiliary duty of customs. I propose to further rationalise the auxiliary duty structure
by reducing the number of duty slabs to four. The loss of revenue on this account
is estimated at Rs. 125 crores.
 8 1 . Agriculture is the bedrock on which our economic development depends
and the vital inputs for this sector have always been accorded a preferential tax
treatment. In line with this principle, I propose to reduce the duty rate on 15
specified pesticides from 110% at present to 75%, by adding them to the list of
pesticides eligible for this concession. I also propose to reduce the import duty on
two pesticide intermediates from the present level of 120% to 65%. So also I propose
to exempt three specified pesticide intermediates completely from excise duty. These
proposals involve a revenue loss of about Rs.8 crores.
 8 2 . Successful agricultural development calls for injection of new seeds which
can increase productivity and imported seeds and planting material can help in
this process. I, therefore, propose to fully exempt from import duty, oil seeds, seeds
of vegetables, flowers and ornamental plants; tubers and bulbs of flowers; cuttings
or saplings of flower plants; and seeds of fruit-plants and pulses, for the purpose
of sowing and planting. In order to ensure efficient transplanting of seedlings, I
also propose to reduce the import duty on rice transplanters from 80% to 40%.
 8 3 . The petrochemical industry suffers from high duty rates on certain basic
feed stocks which are the building blocks of the industry. There is a case for duty
reduction and rationalisation in this area. I, therefore, propose to reduce the import
duty on propylene from 120% to 80%, on butadiene from 55% to 40% and on
benzene from 40% to 25%. I also propose a uniform import duty of 40% for ethyl

 20
benzene and styrene which are essential inputs for the manufacture of polystyrene.
Similarly, I propose to reduce import duty on certain specified feed stocks which
find use in the manufacture of polyethylenes from 120% to 40%. The loss of revenue
on account of the proposals would be around Rs.26 crores.
 8 4 . As a measure of relief to the asbestos cement industry which serves the
housing, water supply and irrigation sectors, I propose to reduce the import duty on
asbestos fibre from 90% to 70%. The proposal involves a loss of revenue of Rs.18
crores.
 8 5 . Films in our country have become an important vehicle of national
integration. I have therefore to worry about the economic health of this important
industry. In order to give relief to the film industry, which is facing increasing
competition from cable TV and video, I propose to reduce the import duty on
unexposed colour negatives of cinematograph film by 20 percentage points from
the existing level. The loss of revenue involved in the proposal is Rs.8 crores.
 8 6 . I propose to reduce the import duty on specified items of machinery required
for the manufacture of fly ash and phosphogypsum bricks and building components.
 8 7 . Last year as a relief to the newspaper industry I had exempted standard
newsprint fully from customs duty. I feel my support base in the Press could do
with some strengthening. I now propose to fully exempt glazed newsprint which is
presently attracting import duty of Rs.550 per metric ton from payment of duty.
The proposal involves a revenue loss of about Rs. 3 crores.
 8 8 . I have already mentioned that import of gold by Indians including persons
of Indian origin as part of their baggage will now be allowed. Every such passenger
will be allowed to bring upto five kilograms of gold and the import duty on such
gold will be Rs.450 per 10 grams, which works out to about 15% in ad valorem
terms. This duty will be payable in convertible foreign exchange. I am confident
that this step will be welcomed by all, except those engaged in the hitherto profitable
business of smuggling this metal into the country.
 8 9 . The restructuring of customs duty being attempted in this Budget is the
beginning of a process in which our customs duties are gradually reduced, over a
three to four year period, to levels comparable with those in other developing
countries. I would like to reassure Honourable Members that they need have no
fear that the process of reducing duties will lead to the de-industrialisation of
India. On the contrary, the reduction is necessary to give the Indian industry an
environment in which it can increase its competitiveness through absorption of
technology and greater integration with the world economy. This is essential if we
are to achieve true self reliance. We shall take effective promotional measures to
build up the competitive strength of Indian industry. The proposed restructuring of
customs duty, together with the other changes in customs duty results in a net
loss of Rs. 2023.35 crores. The loss is estimated in the conventional way and it is
possible that it may be overestimated if we allow for a substantial improvement in
the balance of payments, permitting a larger volume of imports and, therefore, a
higher level of customs revenue.
 9 0 . In the field of excise duties, I have been guided by the objectives of
rationalising the excise duty structure, providing reliefs where necessary and, of
course, raising additional resources to offset the revenue loss from restructuring of
customs tariffs.

 21
 9 1 . While presenting the budget for 1991-92, I had referred to my intention to
rationalise and simplify the procedures, rules and regulations pertaining to indirect
taxes so that the delays in the system are eliminated and the interface between the
tax collector and the tax payer is reduced to the minimum. I propose to make an
advance in this direction by abolishing licensing controls on production and
manufacture under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. The assessees would
simply be required to register themselves with the central excise authorities. At
present assessees are required to get their central excise licences renewed every
five years. Registration will be valid as long as the assessee continues the
manufacturing activity. I am proposing suitable amendments in the law to this
end.
 9 2 . Honourable Members would be aware that a Settlement Commission was
established in 1976 under the Income-tax Act, 1961. I propose to set up a Settlement
Commission, on similar lines, for dealing with customs and central excise disputes
between the Department and the assessee. I trust this will help in speedy settlement
of tax disputes.
 9 3 . Honourable Members may also recall that a law was enacted in 1986 for
the establishment of an appellate tribunal for the adjudication of disputes relating
to the determination of the rates of duties of customs and central excise and to the
valuation in pursuance of Article 323-B of the Constitution. Due to unavoidable
reasons, the tribunal could not be established. I propose to introduce legislation to
suitably amend the Customs and Central Excise Revenues Appellate Tribunal Act,
1986 and set up the tribunal.
 9 4 . The housing sector is important, both socially and for employment
generation and as such deserves special treatment. I propose to fully exempt from
excise duty bricks and tiles having a minimum content of 25% of red mud, which
is a waste product of aluminium industry. I also propose to fully exempt light
weight concrete building blocks from excise duty. Further I propose to reduce the
excise duty on pre-fabricated buildings from 15% to 5%. I also propose to fully
exempt doors and windows made of plastic, iron and steel which incidentally would
conserve our dwindling forest cover. Further, I propose to exempt completely panel
doors which are currently attracting 30% excise duty. The proposals involve a
revenue loss of about Rs. 4 crores.
 9 5 . The glass container industry has been going through a lean period. I
propose to reduce excise duty on glass containers from 40% to 30%. The excise
duty on glass containers manufactured by semi-automatic process and mouth
blown process will also be reduced from the existing levels of 30% and 15% to 20%
and 10%, respectively. The proposals involve a revenue loss of Rs. 30 crores.
 9 6 . At present there is a wide dispersion of duty rates among various sectors
of the textile industry. My primary aim is to simplify and rationalise the tariff
structure and to reduce the duty differential between the various textile fibres and
yarns.
 9 7 . I propose to rationalise and restructure the excise duty on cotton yarn
and cellulosic spun yarn. On cotton yarn, I propose to reduce the multiplicity of
rates by having only five duty slabs. Excise duty on cellulosic spun yarn is also
being similarly rationalised by having three slabs.

 22
 9 8 . I also propose to raise the basic excise duty on viscose fibre from Rs.
10.50 to Rs 12 per kg., on viscose filament yarn from Rs. 12 to Rs 15 per kg., and
on acrylic fibre from Rs. 9.24 to Rs 12 per kg. The duty rates on polyester blended
yarns are also being rationalised.
 9 9 . Rags and synthetic waste are both raw materials for the shoddy woollen
industry. I propose to equate the import duty incidence on both at 110%.
 1 0 0 .With a view to raising the revenue from additional excise duty the proceeds
of which go to the States, I propose to increase the duty on processed cotton fabrics
by restructuring the duty slabs.
 1 0 1 .Several units in the nylon and polyester filament yarn industry are passing
through difficult times. As a measure of relief, I propose to reduce the excise duty
on nylon filament yarn from Rs. 63 to Rs 55 per kg and also to reduce the import
duty on caprolactum from 80% to 50%. I also propose to reduce the excise duty on
polyester filament yarn from Rs.70 to Rs.62 per kg.
 1 0 2 .To promote use of jute by the handloom sector, I propose to fully exempt
jute yarn in hanks from excise duty. Similarly, jute products manufactured in
rural areas by registered co-operative societies, women’s co-operatives, etc. are
also proposed to be fully exempted from excise duty.
 1 0 3 .As a measure of relief to the silk industry, I propose to reduce the import
duty on raw silk from 55% to 30%.
 1 0 4 .The package of proposals relating to the textile industry involve a revenue
reduction of about Rs. 25 crores.
 1 0 5 .I would now take up the proposals for rationalisation and additional revenue
mobilisation.
 1 0 6 .At present excise duty is levied on ad valorem basis on some commodities
and at specific rates on others. Over the years, for administrative reasons, ad
valorem duties have been steadily replaced by specific rates or ad valorem-cum-
specific rates. Ad valorem duties are preferable to specific duties as they ensure
buoyancy in revenue on account of increase in prices, and the Chelliah Committee
has recommended switching over to ad valorem rates for a number of commodities.
It has also recommended that where specific rates are retained, the same should
be revised every year taking into account the price inflation. I propose to make a
modest beginning by switching over to the ad valorem mode of levy where feasible.
 1 0 7 .In respect of major non-ferrous metals, namely, copper, lead and zinc and
products thereof, I propose to fix a uniform ad valorem levy of 10% in the place of
existing specific rates of duty. As regards iron and steel, the excise duty on primary
and semi-finished forms thereof is generally charged at specific rates of duty. For
administrative reasons, I propose to retain the specific rates of excise duty on items
like ingots and certain rolled products like bars, rods, etc., other than of stainless
steel. In respect of these products, I propose to raise the existing rates, which are
presently between Rs. 300 and Rs. 1800 per metric ton to rates between Rs. 400
and Rs. 2000 per metric ton. However, in respect of iron forgings and other steel
products, I propose to prescribe a uniform excise duty of 10%. The proposals
involve a revenue gain of about Rs.400 crores.

 23
 1 0 8 .In my budget speech last year, I mentioned that every Finance Minister
has to do his bit to curb smoking which is injurious to health. This injury to health
is continuing and I would be failing in my duty if I did not make one more attempt
to use the fiscal instrument in this worthy cause. While I do not propose to increase
the duty on non-filter cigarettes of less than 60 mm in length, the duties on all
other cigarettes are being raised by Rs.30 to Rs.100 per thousand depending on
the length. The gain in revenue from the proposals is of the order of Rs.325 crores.
 1 0 9 .I propose to increase the excise duty on certain plastic resins, namely,
polystyrene, low density polyethylene, high density polyethylene and polypropylene
from 30% to 40%. The revenue gain from the proposal is Rs. 165 crores.
 1 1 0 .Watches attract a very low rate of duty of 5% which is out of line with the
general duty structure. I propose to raise the rate to 10%. The revenue gain from
the proposal is estimated to be Rs. 12 crores.
 1 1 1 .I propose to increase the excise duty on cement from Rs. 215 to Rs. 290
per metric ton. The excise duty on cement produced in mini cement plants will also
go up from Rs. 90 to Rs.165 per metric ton, thus maintaining the existing duty
differential of Rs. 125 per metric ton in favour of mini cement plants. However, I
propose to reduce the duty on white cement from 40% to 35% to bring the incidence
closer to that on ordinary cement. The estimated revenue gain from these proposals
is Rs. 376 crores.
 1 1 2 .I propose to raise the excise duty on paints from the existing levels of 15%
and 30% to 20% and 35% respectively. The revenue gain on account of the proposal
is estimated to be Rs. 35 crores.
 1 1 3 .I propose to increase the excise duty on organic surface active agents
from 25% to 30%. The proposal would yield an additional revenue of Rs. 50 crores.
 1 1 4 .At present two-wheelers such as motorcycles and scooters attract excise
duty in slabs of 10%, 15%, 20%, 25% and 30% depending on the engine capacity.
I propose to rationalise the duty structure by levying a uniform duty of 15% on all
two-wheelers of engine capacity upto 75 cc and 25% on all others whose engine
capacity exceeds 75 cc. I also propose to increase the excise duty on light commercial
vehicles from 10% to 15%. The proposals involve a revenue gain of Rs.80 crores.
 1 1 5 .I propose to increase the excise duty on cocoa and cocoa based preparations
from 15% to 25%. The proposal involves a revenue gain of Rs. 24 crores.
 1 1 6 .I propose to increase the excise duty on wires and cables by five percentage
points from the present levels. The additional revenue from the proposal is expected
to be of the order of Rs. 60 crores.
 1 1 7 .I also propose to revise upwards the existing specific rates of excise duty
on tyres, tubes and flaps. However, I propose to reduce the duty on moped tyres
from Rs. 30 to Rs.25 per tyre. The proposals involve a revenue gain of Rs. 40
crores.
 1 1 8 .Special excise duty is being levied at present at the rate of 10% of the
basic excise duty; certain essential items such as tea, coffee, sugar, matches,

 24
kerosene and vanaspati are fully exempted. In addition, high speed diesel oil and
two wheelers attract special excise duty at 5%. I now propose to raise the special
excise duty on products which are presently attracting a 10% rate of duty to 15%.
However, this increase will not be applicable to petroleum products. I also propose
to exempt from this increase certain consumer durables like motor cars and
consumer electronics such as television sets, as these industries are passing through
a difficult phase. This proposal involves a revenue gain of Rs.1025 crores.
 1 1 9 .The changes in trade policy introduced last year have eliminated the
differential incentives for export at higher stages of manufacture. While a uniform
pattern of incentive is generally to be preferred, there is a case for introducing
some disincentives for exports of certain primary products where the same product
can be easily exported in value added form. I propose to impose an export duty of
10% on exports of certain types of finished leather and on unpolished granite in
order to encourage exporters to shift to leather products and polished granite. I am
also imposing an export duty of 5% on iron ore. The proposals are expected to yield
an additional revenue of Rs.142 crores.
 1 2 0 .I have also proposed certain amendments in the Finance Bill seeking to
effect changes in the excise and customs tariff. These amendments are generally
enabling provisions and have no revenue significance. Besides, there are proposals
for amendment of some of the existing notifications. In order to save the time of the
House, I do not propose to recount them.
 1 2 1 .The proposals with regard to changes in excise duty outlined above are
likely to yield additional revenue of Rs. 2515.70 crores. The concessions and reliefs
announced aggregate to Rs. 304.80 crores. Out of the net additional sharable
revenue from excise duties of Rs. 2210.90 crores, the Centre’s share would be Rs.
1146.53 crores and the States’ share Rs. 1064.37 crores.
 1 2 2 .The net impact of my proposals on customs and excise duties taken together
amount to an additional mobilisation of only Rs. 187.55 crores on indirect taxes.
Since the loss in customs duties falls entirely on the Centre whereas the gain in
excise revenue is shared with the States the impact on the Centre’s revenue is a
loss of Rs. 876.82 crores while the States will gain as much as Rs. 1064.37 crores.
 1 2 3 .Copies of notifications giving effect to the changes in customs and excise
duties effective from the 1st March, 1992, will be laid on the Table of the House in
due course.
 1 2 4 .Taking direct and indirect taxes together the changes I have proposed are
expected to result in a net revenue loss of Rs.517 crores to the Centre while the
States will gain Rs.1500 crores. Consequently the estimated year end budget deficit
of the Centre for 1992-93 will be Rs.5389 crores and the fiscal deficit for that year
will be Rs.34408 crores.
 1 2 5 .Our nation will remain eternally grateful to Jawaharlal Nehru for his
vision and insistence that the social and economic transformation of India had to
take place in the framework of an open society, committed to parliamentary
democracy and the rule of law. India’s development is of tremendous significance
for the future of the developing world. To realise our development potential, we
have to unshackle the human spirit of creativity, idealism, adventure and enterprise
that our people possess in abundant measure. We have to harness all our latent

 25
resources for a second industrial revolution and a second agricultural revolution.
Our economy, polity and society have to be extraordinarily resilient and alert if we
are to take full advantage of the opportunities and to minimise the risks associated
with the increasing globalisation of economic processes. We have to accept the
need for reform if we are to avoid an increasing marginalisation of India in the
evolving world economy. The economic policy changes brought about by our
Government in the last eight months are inspired by this vision. Our party is an
inheritor of great traditions of national service. True to this heritage, we commit
ourselves to providing a firm and purposeful sense of direction to the reform process
so that this ancient land of India regains its glory and rightful place in the comity
of nations. This budget represents a contribution to the successful implementation
of this great national enterprise, of building an India free from the fear of war, want
and exploitation, an India worthy of the dreams of the founding fathers of our
republic. We shall pay any price, bear any burden, make any sacrifice to realise
those dreams. India is on the move again. We shall make the future happen.
 1 2 6 .Sir, I commend the Budget to this august House.
 [29th February, 1992]

