 PART B
 35. I now come to my proposals for raising additional resources. Before turning
to the specific measures I am proposing, I will outline briefly the broad scheme, I have
kept in view, in formulating these proposals.
 (a) in view of the paramount need for avoiding any resurgence of inflationary
 pressures, I have endeavoured to restrict the overall deficit in the Budget
 to what I consider to be a reasonably safe limit in the present circumstances.
 (b) Not all the additional resources, however, are proposed to be raised by
 additional taxation. My proposals include a comprehensive scheme for
 compulsory savings, the proceeds of which will be shared between the
 Centre and the States.
 10

 (c) Among the measures of additional taxation, I propose to raise a substantial
 sum from Customs Duties. The additional Customs levies are designed to
 ease the pressure on the balance of payments and to encourage domestic
 production of import substitutes.
 (d) I propose to supplement the present Corporate taxation by a Super
 Profits-tax. I also propose to raise income-tax revenue by levying a
 progressive surcharge on incomes after tax. Income-tax payers will also
 participate in the compulsory savings scheme. My proposals include a
 number of changes which are intended to expedite tax-collection, to curb
 the growth of perquisites and other unnecessary expenses at the cost of
 the Exchequer and to rationalise some of the deductions that are at present
 allowed in Corporate taxation as well as the Wealth tax.
 (e) The changes in taxation on Corporations provide for a measure of incentive
 to exports which are also sought to be encouraged by a budgetary
 contribution for market development and by a reduction in the export
 duty on tea.
 (f) Changes in Excise Duties are in two parts: first, a selective increase in
 duties to restrain consumption especially where It aggravates the balance
 of payments, and second, surcharges of a varying order on a large range
 of commodities but excluding the major items of mass consumption and
 a number of basic intermediate goods.
 (g) I propose also to ask for powers to vary Excise and Customs duties within
 limits to provide a measure of flexibility in either direction in response to
 changing circumstances.
 (h) Finally, my proposals include revision of Postal rates.
CUSTOMS
 36. Keeping in view this broad scheme, I propose to increase import duties on
a number of articles including mineral oils, machinery, Iron and steel products, raw
cotton, rubber, palm oil, cinema films, tobacco, dyes, hardware, electrical and other
instruments and motor vehicle parts. Our Imports of kerosene and diesel oil have been
rapidly rising and have to be restricted till the growing internal production matches
demand. I propose to increase excise duty on most petroleum products substantially
and the import duty will be correspondingly increased. The general rate of duty on
machinery is being raised from 15 per cent to 20 per cent. The concessional rate of 10
per cent applicable to certain types of essential machinery is proposed to be
correspondingly raised to 15 per cent. Our machine building industries have made
rapid strides in the recent past and we want to encourage the establishment of further
capacity for the production of machinery in the country. The changes, which I am
proposing, will be in keeping with this objective. The duty on iron and steel products
 11

is also proposed to be raised generally by 5 per cent. I propose to levy an import duty
of 10 naye paise per kilogram on raw cotton and to increase the duty on raw rubber
from 10 per cent to 20 per cent. On unexposed film, the increase is from Rs.6.60 to
Rs.12 per 100 linear metres and I propose to restore the duty on exposed film to the
statutory rate including the countervailing duty. The duty on palm oil is being raised
by 10 per cent which will still be less than half the statutory rate. I also propose to
increase the duty on certain varieties of tools excluding machine tools and agricultural
implements from 50 per cent to 611 per cent, and on hardware in general from 75 per
cent to 100 per cent. The duty on certain motor vehicle parts is proposed to be raised
from 25 per cent to 50 per cent. This will provide a greater incentive for indigenous
production. I also propose to increase the duty on electrical and non-electrical
instruments by 10 percent. As a result of these and other changes which I need not
detail here, there will be an additional revenue of Rs.65.98 crores in 1963-64.
 37. I also propose to levy general surcharge of 10 percent on all Import duties.
This surcharge will be calculated without taking into account the countervailing duties.
So far as the latter are concerned, there will be increased revenue on account of
changes in excise, of which I shall speak a little later. Further, since an increasing
number of our Excise Duties are on an ad valorem basis, it is proposed that the
corresponding countervailing duty should be calculated on the landed cost inclusive
of basic import duties and not on the c. i. f. price of the product. The total additional
revenue next year from the Import surcharge and countervailing duties has been
estimated at Rs.26.79 crores.
 38. Consistently with my objective of discouraging Imports and encouraging
exports, It is proposed to abolish the export duty on tea but to discontinue the refund
of Excise Duty on It, which is being allowed at present on its export. This will mean
a loss of Customs revenue of Rs.5.38 crores. The total effect of all the changes on the
Customs side will be an increase in revenue of Rs.87.39 crores in 1963-64.
 39. Honourable Members would appreciate that enhancement of Import duties
on this scale is designed to have a decisive Impact on the demand for Imports and on
the indigenous production of competing Items. At a time when our Imports consist
essentially of developmental goods, an extensive increase in import duties cannot be
undertaken lightly. We have also to bear in mind that an expanding volume of world
trade, based on liberal trade policies all round, has a vital bearing on our efforts to
achieve a viable position in our external accounts. If I have thought It necessary,
despite these consideration, to resort to enhancement of Customs Duties on such a
large scale, it is because of the fact that our Imports have grown a great deal over the
past few years and we cannot continue to rely so heavily on the generosity of our
friends for financing imports which will inevitably increase even further with the
growth of our economy.
 12

CENTRAL EXCISE
 40. I have referred earlier to the need for restricting the use of petroleum
products. In order to achieve this, I propose to increase the basic Excise Duty on
motor spirit from Rs.325.10 to Rs.410, on refined diesel oil from Rs.305.25 to Rs.390,
on superior kerosene from the existing basic rate of Rs.79.88 to Rs.210 and on inferior
kerosene from Rs.64.20 to Rs.160, all per kilo litre. There will be a corresponding
increase in the duty on vaporising oil from Rs.283.95 to Rs.370 per kilo litre and on
diesel oil not otherwise specified from Rs.117.70 to Rs.195 per tonne. These increases
will yield an additional revenue of Rs.48.40 crores in 1963-64. I am aware that the
increase in duty on kerosene, which is intended to keep a check on the growth of
demand for this Item which has to be largely imported, will affect poorer sections of
the community, particularly in the rural areas. I propose to offset this partly by removing
the Excise Duty on unprocessed vegetable non-essential oil, including the ordinary
edible oils. This will mean a loss of revenue of Rs.10.25 crores per annum. I, however,
propose to increase the rates of duty on vegetable product, paints and varnishes and
soap, so that the duty hitherto paid on the oil content of these articles will be
approximately covered by the increase in the rates of duty on them. It is also proposed
to increase the rates of duty on cigarettes on a graded scale by amounts varying from
70 naye paise per thousand on the cheapest to Rs.8.70 per thousand on the costly
cigarettes. I also propose to increase the rate of duty on unmanufactured tobacco other
than flue cured and not used for the manufacture of cigarettes, biris, etc., by 40 naye
paise per kilogram. I also propose to increase duty on copper by Rs.200 per tonne in
order to restrict its use. It is also proposed to increase the duty on starwboard where
the production is more than 1500 tonnes per annum. In order to restrict the control on
re-rollers of steel whose number is large and to facilitate enforcement of Excise Duty
on Iron and steel products, It is proposed to revise the structure of duty on this Item
Without any effect on revenue. A duty of Rs.30 per tonne will be levied on blooms,
billets, slabs, steel bars, tin bars and hoe bars in addition to the duty at ingot stage but
further duty will not be charged on bars, rods, wires, forgings, strueturals and other
products If they are made from semi-finished steel which has paid this duty of Rs.31.
The duty on plates, sheets, hoops, strips and skelp will also be similarly reduced by
Rs.30 per tonne. These changes in the rates of Excise Duty will yield an additional
revenue of Rs.60.28 crores next year, out of which Rs.9.60 crores will accrue to the
States as their share.
 41. I do not propose to levy any new excise this year. But in addition to the
changes in rates for the few Items I have just mentioned, I propose to levy selective
surcharges on the Central Excise Duty on several articles with a view to raising revenue
exclusively for the Centre which has to carry the burden of Defence. There will be a
surcharge of 10 per cent on the duty on synthetic dyes, printing and writing paper, jute
manufactures, glass other than plate and sheet glass, chinaware and porcelainware,
tinplate, internal combustion engines, electric storage batteries, electric bulbs, motor

 13

spirit and diesel oils. There will be a surcharge of 20 per cent on tea, coffee,
unmanufactured tobacco, cigarettes, vegetable product, paints and varnishes, soap,
cohmeties, plastics, cellophane, tyres, rubber products, paper other than printing and
writing paper, cotton yarn of less than 35 counts, woollen fabrics, art silk fabrics,
cement, plate and sheet glass, electric motors, dry electric batteries, electric fans,
motor vehicles other than motor cars, films and aluminium. There will be a surcharge
of 331/3 per cent on cigars, rayon and woollen yarn, cotton yarn of 35 counts or more,
silk fabrics, refrigerators and airconditioning machinery and parts thereof, wireless
receiving sets, radiograms and motor cars. The surcharges have been so arranged as to
bear lightly on selected intermediate goods and rather heavily on luxury Items consumed
by the more well to do classes. As for articles which enter into common consumption,
such as sugar, cotton fabrics, footwear, matches and cycle parts as well as patent and
proprietary medicines, there will be no change in the excise duty. Most of the basic,
intermediate and other products such as soda ash, caustic soda, acids, gases, plywood,
asbestos cement products, pig Iron, steel ingots iron and steel products, zinc, furnace
oil, asphalt and bitumen, petroleum products not otherwise specified and electric wires
and cables are also excluded from the scope of the surcharges.
 42. The total additional revenue as a result of the surcharges will be Rs.55.93
crores. For the reason I have already mentioned, It has been proposed in the Finance
Bill that the States will not share in the surcharge. The net additional revenue in
1963-64 to the Centre on the Central Excise side as a result of the changes in the rates
and the surcharges will be Rs.106.61 crores.
 43. I share the anxiety of the House about the price effect of the changes in
Excise Duty. I should, therefore, like to mention the exact effect on items of common
consumption on the assumption that the entire duty is passed on to the consumer
which in actual fact should not be the case. As the duty on ordinary edible oils has
been removed, their prices should go down. In the case of matches, sugar and footwear,
where there has been no change in duty there should be no increase in prices at all.
The surcharge on cotton yarn and the import duty on raw cotton will mean increase
only of a fraction over a naya paisa per square metre in the cost of cotton fabrics and
should not call for an increase in their prices also. Increase in the duty on tea is of 3
to 9 naye paise per kilogram, varying according to its quality, while that for vegetable
product is 6 naye paise per kilogram. Increase in washing soap is of the order of 1.5
naye palse per bar of 45 tolas. The main increase which is in kerosene will be 10 naye
paise per bottle of superior kerosene and 7 naye paise for that of interior kerosene, in
order to ensure that there is no profiteering through unwarranted price increases, suitable
orders are being issued under the Defence of India Rules.
 44. In our present position, it is essential to have also the authority to be able
to act at short notice in order to check profiteering and to regulate resources and
demand. Government has already powers to reduce Customs or Excise Duty. In the

 14

Finance Bill, It is also proposed to take power to enhance these duties or to impose a
Customs Duty within specified limits in the course of the year. The limits proposed
are 10 per cent ad valorem for goods subject to Excise Duty and that rate or 25 per
cent of the existing statutory rate whichever is higher for import duty. Given powers
to vary Excise and Customs Duties within limits, It should be possible to adjust fiscal
policy promptly in response to changing circumstances.
DIRECT TAXES
 45. In the field of direct taxes, I propose to levy an additional surcharge for
the purpose of the Union rising progressively from 4 per cent to 10 per cent on the
incomes after tax, of individuals, Hindu undivided families, unregistered firms and
associations of persons. A part of this additional liability can be discharged through a
compulsory deposit, as I shall explain later. It is also proposed to levy a surcharge for
the Union of 20 per cent on the income-tax payable by registered firms. Additional
yield of Rs.45 crores is expected from these measures in 1963-64. In regard to the
existing surcharges of income-tax and the special surcharge, I propose to abolish the
present higher exemption limits of Rs.15,000 for certain Hindu undivided families
and Rs.7,500 for individuals, unregistered firms, etc. The revenue effect of this measure
will be small but it will simplify the structure of these surcharges by removing the
complicated system of marginal relief involved in these higher limits.
 46. With a view to speeding up collections, I propose to introduce a new
provision in section 141A of the income-tax Act to provide that assessees who pay the
tax assessed on them or pay the tax due on the basis of their returns before the 1st
January of the relevant assessment year will be entitled to a credit for 1 per cent of the
tax so paid by them. Correspondingly, it has been provided that assessees who do not
pay the tax on the basis of their returns by the 31st December of the assessment year
shall be liable to pay interest at 2 per cent per annum on the tax found due on the basis
of their returns. Sections 209 and 210 of the income-tax Act are also being amended
to secure that the amount of advance tax demanded by the income-tax Officer, on the
basis of the last completed regular assessment of the assessee, could be revised by him
if the income determined in a provisional assessment for a later year is higher. It is
also proposed to restrict, in the case of companies, the deduction for expenditure on
account of remuneration and perquisites to Rs.60,000 per annum for an individual
employee. Honourable Members will, I am sure, appreciate that a proliferation of
perquisites and high salaries for the privileged employees is one of those phenomena
of modern corporate life which cannot be allowed to remain unchecked. These measures
to expedite tax collection and to put a curb on high salaries and perquisites are expected
to yield a revenue of Rs.12 crores in 1963-64.
 47. I also propose to amend the provisions in Sections 139 and 220 of the
income-tax Act relating to the charging of interest for delay in submission of returns
and for non-payment of tax in due time, to provide for a reduction of the amount of

 15

interest in consequence of any reduction of the tax assessed under an order on appeal,
reference or revision. Regarding charging of interest for delay in filing of returns, It is
also proposed to make a provision enabling income-tax authorities to waive or reduce
the interest in cases of hardship where the return was delayed due to factors beyond
the control of the assessee.
 48. It is also proposed to make some amendments to the provisions of the
income-tax Act relating to the recovery of arrear tax dues through officers of the State
Governments, functioning as Tax Recovery Officers, with a view to removing certain
difficulties and to expedite recovery of arrears.
 49. I propose to withdraw the existing exemption up to Rs.25,000 allowed for
jewellery in section 5 of the Wealth-tax Act for the purpose of computing the net
wealth of assessees. At a time when we have launched on a new gold policy to reduce
the glamour for gold, an exemption for jewellery in Wealthtax would be inappropriate.
The additional revenue expected from this measure is about Rs.40 lakhs.
 50. The 10-year Treasury Deposit Certificates and the 12-year National Plan
Savings Certificates which are exempt from Wealth-tax have been replaced by 10-year
Defence Deposit Certificates and 12-year National Defence Certificates. It is, therefore,
proposed to include the new Certificates also in the category of exempted assets under
the Wealth-tax Act.
EXPORTS
 51. Honourable Members will recall the concession in income-tax given to
exporters last year. I propose to continue it this year also. In addition, I propose to add
to the incentive for manufacturers. This will apply to manufacturers who are engaged
in any of the industries listed in the First Schedule to industries (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1951 other than those mentioned or may be notified and who export
their goods themselves or where the goods manufactured by them are exported by the
first purchasers from them. Such manufacturers will be allowed in addition to the
existing tax rebate, a further rebate of income-tax and super-tax on a sum equivalent
to 2 per cent of the value of such exports made hereafter, subject to the limit of the tax
otherwise payable by them on their total income.
 52. I have pointed out earlier the importance and necessity of helping our
“infant” industries to overcome the difficulties and obstacles which they encounter in
making themselves known in overseas markets. If we are to achieve the kind of increase
in our export levels, which we need to get over our chronic foreign exchange difficulties,
we must rely on our new industries to turn increasingly to export markets. A provision
of Rs.3 crores has been made in the budget for 1963-64 for developing new markets
including publicity, survey, research and promotion of exports. Out of this, suitable
sums will be placed at the disposal of Export Promotion Councils and other similar
bodies to help in the vital task of export promotion.
 16

SUPER PROFITS-TAX
 53. So far I have applied myself to practicable increases in the existing
instruments of taxation. They are, however, not enough either to raise adequate resources
or to secure an equitable distribution of the burden we have to shoulder.
 54. In our system of corporate taxation, there is no correlation between the
rate of tax and the percentage of profits. This shortcoming needs to be remedied
especially at the present juncture when the corporate sector like the rest of the
community must bear its share of the increased national responsibility. Instead of
revising the present system, I propose to super-impose on it a Super Profits-tax. That
tax will operate when the income of a company after deducting the income-tax and
Super-tax payable by It exceeds 6 per cent of its capital and reserves except for such
amounts of reserves which have been allowed as deduction in computing the total
income for income-tax. The rate of tax will be 50 per cent when that income is above
6 per cent but not above 10 per cent of the capital and 60 per cent on incomes above
10 per cent. It is hoped that this tax will act as a disincentive to excessive profits and
will help to keep down the prices.
 55. It is proposed to disallow expenses on commission, advertisement and
entertainment to the extent that there is reason to believe that they are inflated for
reducing profits artificially.
 56. The Super Profits-tax is expected to yield a revenue of about Rs.25 crores
in 1963-64.
COMPULSORY SAVINGS
 57. Apart from taxation, we have relied on the voluntary savings of the people
to meet our growing requirements of development. Voluntary savings and contributions
have an important part to play in the present Emergency also. In view, however, of the
sharp increase in our requirements, it would be appropriate to introduce a comprehensive
scheme of compulsory saving to supplement the effort by way of additional taxation
and voluntary savings. Like taxation, compulsory saving will restrain demand in the
immediate future; whereas unlike taxation, it would provide an earning asset to the
people and generally help in inculcating the saving habit in the country.
 58. Accordingly, I am introducing a Bill which will enable Government to
provide for compulsory saving on the part of different sections of the people on
appropriate scales, subject to certain maxima provided for in the Bill. These maxima
are: 50 per cent of the basic land revenue on 1959-60 assessment for agriculturists; 3
per cent of the annual rental value of property for property-owners in urban areas; 3
per cent of salary for employees who earn more than Rs.1500 per annum but are not
liable to income-tax; and other comparable rates for professional and other classes. In
the case of income tax payers whose residual income after payment of tax does not
exceed Rs.6,000, an amount equal to 3 per cent thereof and in the case of others
 17

having a higher amount of residual income, an amount equal to 2 per cent thereof will,
on being deposited under the compulsory savings scheme, be deducted from the new
additional surcharge payable by them. Of the total yield of Rs.45 crores under the
Union surcharge, already referred t5 some Rs.12 crores may, therefore, accrue as
compulsory deposit. Deposits under the scheme will not be withdrawable for a period
of five years and would carry simple interest at 4 per cent per annum.
 59. Arrangements for collecting compulsory deposits are being worked out in
co-operation with the States which will get a share in the proceeds of the scheme.
Total collections under the scheme and its net contribution to additional resources are
difficult to estimate; but on an approximate basis, total collections under the scheme
might amount to between Rs.65 crores and Rs.70 crores. Pending arrangements for
sharing the proceeds with the States, I am taking credit for a net increase in the
Central resources of Rs.40 crores byway of proceeds of compulsory saving, including
Rs.12 crores from income-tax payers.
 60. The additional resources from all the direct levies proposed, including
compulsory savings, would thus be Rs.110.4 crores, of which Rs.40 crores would be
by way of compulsory savings) Rs.33 crores by way of Union surcharge on income-tax,
Rs.25 crores by way of the super-profits tax and Rs.12.4 crores by way of measures of
rationalisation and reduction or elimination of exemptions.
POSTAL RATES
 61. As the House is aware, the Postal and Telegraph branches of the Posts
and Telegraphs Department have generally been working at a loss. Many of the services
we provide on the postal side are unremunerative. The average cost of post card to the
Department is 8 nP whereas we receover only 5 nP. The annual loss on post cards
alone is over Rs.3 crores. On registered letters we lose about Rs.11/2 crores. The Posts
and Telegraphs services are being extended to remote areas by the opening of Posts
and Telegraphs offices which are not remunerative. On all these considerations, it is
proposed to raise the existing rate of 5 nP. for single and 10 nP. for reply post cards to
6 nP. and 12 nP. respectively. Local post cards as a separate category will be abolished.
For book, pattern and sample packets, the rate will be increased from 8 nP. for the first
50 grams and 3 nP. for every additional 25 grams to 10 nP. and 5 nP. respectively. The
rates on parcels will be increased from the existing charge of 50 nP to 60 nP for every
400 grams. The registration fee is proposed to be raised from 50 nP to 55 nP and the
acknowledgement fee from 6 nP to 10 nP. Certain other increases in the fees for
certificate of posting, insurance, business reply permits and post box rentals are also
being proposed. The additional revenue expected from the increase in the postal rates
will be about Rs.3.15 crores.
 62. It is proposed to revise the inland telegram rates from 80 nP. for the first
8 words and 8 nP for, each additional word to one rupee for the first 10 words and 10
nP for each additional word. The charges for greetings telegrams will be raised from
 18

50 nP for 6 words and 7 nP for each additional word to 75 nP for the first 8 words and
10 nP for each additional word. The rates for express telegrams will be correspondingly
doubled. The separate category of Local telegrams including greetings telegrams will
be abolished. At present, the charge for registration of abbreviated telegraphic addresses
varies with the period of validity of the registration. It is proposed to levy a uniform
fee of Rs.50 for a period of 12 months in future. These measures are expected to bring
to Rs.95 lakhs.
 63. As regards trunk telephones, the concession on urgent calls during the
period the concessional rates apply, will be reduced from 50 per cent to 25 per cent
and the concession on priority calls during this period will be withdrawn. This will
yield about Rs.50 lakhs. The changes in postal, telegraph and telephone rates would in
all yield Rs.4.6 crores.
 64. As the surplus of the Posts and Telegraphs Department, like the surplus of
the Railways, after payment of the dividend to the General Revenues is transferred for
credit to its Renewals Reserve Fund, It will not have any net effect on the Revenue
Budget. Credit for the transfers to the Railways and Posts and Telegraphs Funds has
already been taken into account in arriving at the overall deficit.
EMERGENCY RISKS INSURANCE
 65. I had said earlier that at present rates, receipts on account of Emergency
Risks insurance would amount to Rs.36 crores in the coming year. As the premium for
Emergency Risks insurance is not meant to be a fiscal levy, it must vary from quarter
to quarter depending upon an assessment of the risk. For the quarter commencing let
April, 1963 1 propose to reduce the premia from 25 naye paise to 15 naye paise in
respect of factories and other installations and from 15 naye paise to 10 naye paise for
goods. This reduction for the quarter commencing let April 1963 would reduce receipts
for that quarter from Rs.9 crores to Rs.6 crores. As the rates for the subsequent quarters
cannot be decided upon at this stage, I am providing for the present for a reduction of
Rs.3 crores only in the receipts on account of Emergency Risks insurance, that is for
Rs.33 crores against Rs.36 crores indicated earlier.
STATE RESOURCES
 66. In mobilising resources for the coming year we have also to bear in mind
the needs of the States for additional resources. In this connection, I have already
introduced a Bill to amend the Central Sales-tax Act. The amendments proposed in it
will yield a revenue of Rs.22.5 crores in 1963-64 of which Rs.1.5 crores will accrue
to the Centre from Union Territories and Rs.21 crores will accrue to the States. In a
full year the yield to the Centre and the States will be Rs.30 crores. As a result of the
changes in Central Excise Duties, Rs.9.60 crores will go as the States’ share. They
will also share in the Compulsory Savings Scheme. They will thus have a substantial
accretion to their resources in the next year as a result of the steps I have proposed.
Notwithstanding this, the States would still need to tap in a major way the resources

 19

open to them. I have brought this to their notice in my discussions with the Chief
Ministers and Finance Ministers of the; States. While the burden of finding resources
for the defence of the country rests heavily on the Centre, It is the duty of the States
to find larger resources to finance their part of the Plan.
 67. The taxation proposals outlined by me would yield a total additional
revenue of Rs.275.50 crores. Of this, a sum of Rs.9.60 crores will accrue to the States
and the balance of Rs.265.90 crores to the Centre, reducing the revenue deficit to
Rs.77 lakhs.
 68. The Compulsory Savings Scheme is expected to bring in at the Centre an
additional sum of Rs.40 crores over and above the net realisations from Small Savings
of Rs.105 crores. The reduction in the rates of the Emergency Risks insurance for the
first quarter would reduce the credit to the Fund by Rs.3 crores. Taking into account
the amount to be realised by way of additional taxation and the net Improvement of
Rs.37, crores in Capital receipts, the overall deficit would stand reduced to Rs.151
crores, which will be met by expansion of treasury bills. Considering everything, it
would not be unreasonable to expect that deficit financing of this order will not have
any adverse effect on the economy.
CONCLUSION
 69. This then is the sum total of my proposals for raising resources for defence
and development next year-a total effort of Rs.305.90 crores of which Customs Duties
account for Rs.87.39 crores, direct levies, including compulsory saving, on individuals
and companies for Rs.110.40 crores and Excise Duties and inter-State Sales-tax for
the balance of Rs.108.11 crores. It has not been an easy thing for me to contemplate
that the proposals I am called upon to make for my fifth budget add up in their
magnitude and range to very much more than the sum total of my proposals during the
previous four budgets. It would certainly not be easy for the people to accept these
proposals without a measure of privation on their part. The questions that each of us
individually and all of us as a nation have to consider, however, are: Can we afford not
to meet the challenge of the Chinese aggression? Would it be prudent to try and meet
this challenge by forsaking our aspirations for development? Or indeed, would it be
wise not to face It squarely and unleash instead the forces of inflation? It is because
I have been unable to answer these questions in the affirmative that I have ventured to
submit the proposals that I have. I have endeavoured, in doing so, to be fair and
constructive to the best of my ability. I only hope that in time, the determination of the
people in meeting the challenge that confronts us would make it possible for us to turn
our energies even more vigorously to the pursuit of peace, freedom and progress with
justice, to which this nation is dedicated.
 (February 28, 1963)



 20

