 PART B
 71. The formulation of the Budget is an annual exercise but, to be meaningful,
it has to be set in a longer time frame. Our fiscal system has served us well. However,
over the years, objective conditions have changed calling for new responses. I am
quite aware that it is not possible to usher in all the changes at one stroke, yet we have
to initiate a process of reform which can be completed in a phased manner in a time
bound frame. We will be moving towards the formulation of a long-term fiscal policy
co-terminous with the Plan. I hope to initiate a debate on this after the budget session
is over.
 72. In the area of direct taxes, an important priority is to create an environment
for growth, productivity and savings. The system of direct taxation which can help in
achieving these objectives will also secure better tax compliance, and will be more
equitable.
 14

 73. Our approach to the reform of the personal income-tax is as follows.
First, the rates of personal income-tax should be recast and rationalised with a view to
making the structure simple and reasonable. While maintaining the progressivity of
the tax structure, it needs to be ensured that the combined effect of the rates of taxes
on personal income and wealth are not counter-productive. Second, the exemption
limit should be so fixed as to eliminate a large number of small assessments and to
provide relief to low and middle income groups. Third, the tax structure should be
stable. Fourth, in order to make more effective use of the administrative machinery in
reducing tax evasion, the emphasis in tax assessments should shift from routine
examination of a very large number of returns to a thorough scrutiny of a sample of
cases. Fifth, it must be ensured that when tax evasion is detected, the penalties are
swift and severe. Sixth, a tax, however laudable in intent, should have no place in the
statute book if it has outlived its utility.
 74. The statutory rate of corporate tax in India is high, but because of various
exemptions, the effective rate is significantly lower. While each exemption has a
rationale, the combined effect of all these exemptions, taken together, is to erode the
tax base. The present system also affects different taxpayers very differently. This
cumbersome system has led to unending litigation, and has given wide discretion to
those who make the accounts and those who scrutinise them.
 75. My proposals for the current year in the area of corporate taxation are
designed to introduce a directional change by discontinuing certain exemptions and
rationalising the rates. For the present, I am not going all the way partly because of
revenue considerations and partly because I would like to Watch the response to the
changes being proposed now. In order to have the benefit of the views of the Honourable
Members, I shall also put forward a set of proposals regarding corporation tax which
could be introduced in a phased manner in the next two years. I believe that an open
debate on these issues is necessary so that the decisions that we take are the right
ones. I propose to announce Government’s decisions in this regard in my reply to the
debate on the finance Bill so that there is no uncertainty in the matter.
 76. In respect of indirect taxes, my immediate task is to bring about changes
which would help in reducing costs of investment in priority sectors, encourage the
growth of the small-scale sector and remove certain other distortions. During the
course of the year, I shall be giving consideration to other changes that might be
required for the indirect tax system to make its full contribution to the further
development of our economy.
 77. I should make it clear that the Government is determined to pursue its
socio-economic goals without fear or favour, and those who continue to indulge in tax
evasion or other economic offences will do so at their peril.
 78. Let me now come to my specific proposals. I shall first deal with the
proposals in the field of direct taxes.
 15

 79. I propose to raise the exemption limit for personal income taxation from
Rs.15,000 to Rs.18,000. As a result, out of about 40 lakh assessees, around 10 lakh
will not have to pay any income-tax.
 80. I also propose to restructure the rate schedule for personal incomes. After
the nil rate slab of Rs.18,000, the rate of income-tax on the slab of Rs.18,001 to
Rs.25,000 will be 25 per cent; on the slab of Rs.25,001 to Rs.50,000, the rate will be
30 per cent; on the slab of Rs.50,001 to Rs.1 lakh, the rate will be 40 per cent; and on
the income in excess of Rs.1 lakh, the rate will be 50 per cent. The new rate schedule
will result in a reduction in tax at all levels of income. On a taxable income of Rs.20,000,
the tax relief under the new rate schedule will be 50 per cent of the income-tax at
Current rates; on a taxable income of Rs.25,000, the relief will be 22 per cent; on a
taxable income of Rs.50,000 the relief will be 18 per cent and on an income of Rs.1
lakh, the relief will be 17 per cent. With the reduction in the tax rate slabs from eight
to four, the rate schedule will also stand simplified. The rate schedule applicable to
Hindu undivided families having one or more members with separate incomes exceeding
the exemption limit is also proposed to be consequently restructured.
 81. I also propose to discontinue the surcharge on income-tax in the case of
all categories of non-corporate tax-payers.
 82. With the proposed modifications, the maximum marginal rate of income-
tax on personal incomes will stand reduced from 61.875 per cent to 50 per cent in fact,
the average rate of tax would be even lower.
 83. The calculated loss of revenue, during the financial year 1985-86, due to
the proposed rationalisation of the tax structure is Rs.200 crores on account of income-
tax and Rs.197 crores on account of surcharge. However, taking into account the
better compliance as a result of reduction of tax rates, the actual loss is estimated at
Rs.197 crores and that too in respect of surcharge. This entire loss will be to the
account of the Centre.
 84. In fulfilment of the promise made in our Election Mainifesto, the scheme
of compulsory deposits by income-tax payers is being abolished with effect from 1st
April 1985. However, keeping in view the overall ways and means position, I propose
to provide that repayments of instalments in respect of earlier deposits and payment of
interest due in the financial year 1985-86 would be postponed by one year. The unpaid
amount will continue to earn interest and shall be repaid in the financial year 1986-87
along with instalments due for repayment in that year. I propose to introduce a separate
bill for this purpose this evening.
 85. The structure of wealth-tax has been examined by a number of high-
powered bodies, including the Estimates Committee and the Public Accounts Committee
of Parliament. A number of suggestions have been made by them for making the
system of wealth-tax more conducive to the promotion of savings and investment in
 16

the economy. The present basic exemption limit of Rs. 1,50,000 has also been
considered to be inadequate in view of the rise in prices. It may be recalled that a limit
of Rs.1 lakh had been set as early as 1964. Taking these considerations into account,
I propose to raise the wealth-tax exemption limit to Rs.2,50,000 and to provide a nil
rate slab in respect of net wealth up to Rs.2,50,000, I also propose to restructure the
wealth-tax rate schedule. Under the new rate schedule, the rate of wealth-tax on the
slab of Rs.2,50,001 to Rs.10,00,000 will be 1/2 per cent; on the slab from Rs.10,00,001
to Rs.20,00,000, the rate will be 1 per eerie and on the slab over Rs.20,00,000, the rate
will be 2 per cent. The maximum marginal rate will, therefore, stand reduced from 5
per cent to 2 per cent. I also propose to restructure the rate schedule applicable to
Hindu undivided families having one or more members with independent wealth
exceeding the exemption limit.
 86. The value of one house is exempt from wealth-tax upto Rs.2 lakhs. A
taxpayer is also entitled to exemption from wealth-tax in respect of specified assets up
to an aggregate value of Rs.2,65,000. An additional exemption of Rs.35,000 is allowed
in respect of units of the Unit Trust of India and deposits under the National Deposit
Scheme. I propose to replace the separate exemption limits, aggregating Rs.5 lakhs,
by a consolidated exemption limit of Rs.5 lakhs in respect of all these assets.
 87. My proposals relating to wealth-tax would not result in any loss during
the financial year 1985-86. Although the estimated loss during the financial year 1986-
87 is Rs.70 crores, I expect that, due to improved compliance, there would be no loss
of revenue over a period.
 88. As both wealth-tax and estate duty laws apply to the property of a person,
the former applying to his property before death and the latter after his death, the
existence of two separate laws with reference to the same property amounts to
procedural harassment to the taxpayers and the heirs of the deceased who have to
comply with the provisions of two different laws. Having considered the relative
merits of the two taxes, I am of die view that estate duty has not achieved the twin
objectives with which it was introduced, namely, to reduce unequal distribution of
wealth and assist the States in financing their development schemes. While the yield
from estate duty is only about Rs.20 crores, its cost of administration is relatively
high. I, therefore, propose to abolish the levy of estate duty in respect of estates
passing on deaths occurring on or after 16th March, 1985. I will come forward in due
course with suitable legislation for this purpose.
 89. Earlier in my speech, I referred to certain measures that the Government
proposes to take for the benefit of industrial and other workers. These include the
proposals to give worker’s dues the same priority as secured creditors in the event of
closure of companies, the proposed increase in the bonus limit, and the introduction of
a stock option scheme for exployees and workers. With the raising of the exemption,
limit for personal taxation most of the industrial workers will not be required to pay
 17

any income-tax. As a measure of further relief to them, I propose to raise the monetary
ceilling on the exempt amount of retrenchment compensation received by them from
Rs.20,000 to Rs.50,000. I also propose to provide that retrenchment compensation
paid under schemes approved by the Central Government will be exempt from tax in
full. I may also inform Honourable Members that the Government is giving
consideration to the formulation of a scheme for encouraging industry to involve
workers in management and, if necessary, suitable fiscal incentives will be provided
for this purpose.
 90. Under a provision made by the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1984,
salaried taxpayers are chargeable to tax on the perquisite represented by interest-free
loans or loans at concessional rates of interest provided by their employers for certain
purposes. As a measure of further relief to salaried taxpayers, I propose to repeal this
provision.
 91. With a view to providing further encouragement for indigenous scientific
research, I propose to provide that lump sum consideration received by scientists for
the know-how developed by them would be spread over a period of three years and
charged to tax accordingly. I also propose to provide that industry may write off the
lump sum consideration paid for acquiring know-how in six annual instalments. In
cases where the know-how has been developed in Government laboratories,
Universities, laboratories owned by public sector companies and other recognised
institutions, the write off would be permitted over a period of three years.
 92. Authors of University level text books, dictionaries, etc. in Hindi and
other Indian languages are entitled to a deduction of 25 per cent of the income by way
of royalty, copyright fees, etc. derived by them in respect of such books. This concession
is coming to an end with the current assessment year. In order to encourage the writing
of such books, I propose to continue this concession for another five years.
 93. I propose to place donations to the Indira Gandhi Memorial Trust at par
with donations to other funds of national importance. I also propose to provide that
donations to the Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund will qualify for 100 per cent
deduction, as against the deduction of only 50 per cent allowed at present.
 94. In the context of the need to bring tax evaders to book, I see little
justification for providing immunity from the penal provisions to those who make a
disclosure only after incriminating books of account and assets in their possession
have been seized by the Income-tax Department. I, therefore, propose to remove the
provisions made by the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1984 for the grant of
immunity from penal provisions in such cases.
 95. I also propose to enter into a dialogue with State Governments and other
authorities with a view to setting up special courts empowered to try tax evaders in
respect of criminal proceedings initiated against them.
 18

 96. As a measure for countering tax avoidance, I propose to plug an existing
lacuna in section 167A of the Income-tax Act by providing that an association of
persons shall be charged to income-tax at the maximum marginal rate if the individual
shares of the members, in even a part of its income, are indeterminate or unknown.
Under a provision made by the Finance Act, 1933, business profits derived by charitable
and religious trusts are not exempt from income-tax, except in certain cases.
Conformably with this provision, I propose to provide that exemption from wealth-tax
will also not be available in respect of business assets of such trusts.
 97. I shall now deal with the proposals relating to corporation tax.
 98. For the financial year 1985-86, I propose to reduce the basic rate of income-
tax applicable to companies by 5 percentage points. At present, closely-held industrial
companies are charged to tax at a lower rate than that applicable to other closely-held
companies. I propose to prescribe. a common rate for all closely-held companies,
except trading and investment companies. In the result, the basic rate of income-tax in
the case of certain categories of closely-held companies will stand reduced by 10
percentage points, from 65 per cent to 55 per cent. This will particularly benefit
companies carrying on employment-oriented activities, such as, consultancy and
advertising services and services for promotion of tourism.
 99. The proposed reduction in tax rates, both for the corporate and non-
corporate sectors, would have to go hand in hand with the discontinuance of certain
concessions. Under a provision made in 1980, additional depreciation is granted in
respect of machinery and plant installed during the five-year period, from I st April,
1980 to 3 1 st March, 1985. In the context of the proposed reduction in the rates of tax
and the increase in the general rate of depreciation allowance, from 10 per cent to 15
per cent, with effect from the current assessment year, I do not consider it necessary
to continue the grant of additional depreciation in respect of machinery and plant
installed after 31st March, 1985.
 100. Under an existing provision, expenditure incurred by companies and co-
operative societies on approved programmes of rural development is deducted in
computing their taxable profits. While the objective is laudable, a fiscal concession is
not the right instrument to achieve this objective. I, therefore, propose to discontinue
this concession, except in relation to programmes which have been approved by the
prescribed authority before 17th March, 1985. The tax exemption allowed in respect
of profits derived from the publication of books, which would lapse with the assessment
year 1985-86, is not proposed to be continued. I also propose to withdraw the tax
concession in respect of dividends received by Indian companies from certain foreign
companies.
 101. The tax holiday concession is at present available in respect of industrial
undertakings that go into production before 1st April, 1985; hotels which start
 19

functioning and ships which are brought into use before that date are also eligible for
this concession. I propose to extend this concession for a further period of 5 years.
 102. It is necessary to provide our exporters with requisite resources for
modernisation, technological upgradation, product development and other activities
with a view to raising their efficiency and productivity, not only in the export sector
but also in the economy as a whole. In view of these considerations, I propose to
replace the tax concession under section 80HHC of the Income-tax Act by a new
provision. Under the new provision, exporters will be entitled to a deduction of an
amount, not exceeding 50 per cent of their export profits, carried to a reserve account
to be utilised for the purposes of their business.
 103. To facilitate the mobilisation of internal resources by the tea industry for
purposes of investment in new machinery, fresh planting and replanting etc. I propose
to provide that companies engaged in the business of growing and manufacturing tea
in India would be entitled to a deduction up to 20 per cent of their profits deposited
in a special account with the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
Withdrawals from this account would be allowed only for specified purposes in
accordance with schemes to be approved by the Tea Board.
 104. With a view to leaving larger funds with banks for meeting their increasing
social commitments, I propose to discontinue interest-tax in relation to interest accruing
after 31st March, 1985. I also propose to provide that banks may make tax deductible
provisions for their bad and doubtful debts up to an amount equal to 10 per cent of the
profits or 2 per cent of the aggregate average advances made by their rural branches,
whichever is higher.
 105. I also propose to discontinue the provisions relating to disallowance of 20
per cent of the expenditure, in excess of Rs.1,00,000, on advertisement, publicity and
sales promotion; running and maintenance of aircraft and motor cars; and payments
made to hotels. The provision relating to the disallowance of 15 per cent of the interest
paid by non-banking non-financial companies on the public deposits raised by them is
also proposed to be discontinued.
 106. Taking into account the effect of withdrawal of some of the axisting
concessions and expected collections on account of the recent Supreme Court judgement
regarding section 80J of the Income-tax Act, loss of revenue in 1985-86 due to my
proposals in respect of relief in tax on corporate sector will be more than offset.
 107. The other modifications proposed by me in the sphere of direct taxes are
of relatively minor importance. I would not like to take the time of the House by
elaborating them at this stage.
 108. I will not come to my proposals relating to the phased reform of corporation
tax to which I made a reference in the earlier part of my speech.
 20

 109. The scheme envisages that next year the basic rate of income-tax in the
case of all categories of companies would be further reduced by 5 percentage points.
In the third year, I propose to discontinue the surcharge on income-tax payable by
companies and to abolish surtax. At the same time, I propose to discontinue the grant
of investment allowance in a phased manner during the next two years. While
withdrawal of investment allowance may have an adverse effect on high-growth capital
intensive industries, the general reduction in corporation tax would lead to higher
retained profits which would benefit all companies. The alternative to the above
proposal is to continue the investment allowance with no further reduction in the rates
of corporation tax and surcharge. I shall be grateful for the comments of the Hon’ble
Members.
 110. I now turn to my proposals on the indirect taxes.
 111. Taking customs duties first, my principal proposals is with regard to crude
petroleum. Honourable Members will recall that in the last year’s Budget, auxiliary
duty on crude petroleum was raised from Rs.9.50 to Rs.100 per tonne. I propose to
increase it to Rs.300 per tonne. I also propose to levy-.on crude petroleum a basic
customs duty of 10 per cent ad valorem. The revenue yield from these proposals is
estimated to be Rs.620 crores in a full year. Taking this and other factors into account,
there will be an increase in the price of P 0 L products. In other cases, I propose to
continue the auxiliary duty at the existing rates upto the 31st March, 1986.
 112. As a measure of protection to the indigenous bearings industry, I propose
to increase the basic customs duty on ball and roller bearings by 50 per cent of the
existing rates. This will result in a revenue gain of about Rs.20 crores in a year.
 113. Over the years, the rate of duty applicable to project imports has gone up
and reached the level of 65 per cent. With a view to bringing down capital costs, I
propose to reduce the present customs duty of 65 per cent applicable to project imports
in general to 45 per cent ad valorem and to provide for a lower rate of 25 per cent to
imports for power projects and total exemption from duty for equipment for fertiliser
projects. I propose to extend the concessional project imports rate of 45 per cent ad
valorem to the public telephone exchange network project. These measures will totally
cost the exchequer Rs.290 crores in a year. ,
 114. Honourable Members will recall that in the last year’s Budget, customs
duty on imported wood pulp and wood chips for the paper industry was reduced to 30
per cent and nil, respectively. As a measure to relieve the pressure on our forest
resources, I now propose to totally exempt imported pulp and wood chips and make
this concession available to all user industries. Customs duty on wood in certain
specified forms is also proposed to be reduced from the existing level of 100 per cent
to 10 per cent ad valorem. These concessions would entail a revenue sacrifice of
about Rs.17.70 crores in a full year.
 21

 115. Not all the proposals in my basket qualify to be described as crude or
wooden. To encourage alternative sources of energy, I propose to provide for total
exemption from customs duty in respect of wind operated electricity generators and
wind operated battery chargers. I also propose to reduce customs duty on exhaust gas
analysers and smoke meters in order to help enforce anti-pollution norms. The revenue
effect of these concessions will be Rs.7.54 crores.
 116. I now propose a set of measures aimed at export promotion. I am abolishing
the export duties on twelve items which comprise iron ore, managanese ore, raw
cotton, chromite ore and concentrate, cotton waste, animal feed, manganese dioxide,
deoiled groundnut oilcake, raw wool, kyanite and bridge mica. With this abolition,
export duty will now be leviable only on four items, namely, coffee, unmanufactured
tobacco, mica other than bridge mica and hides and skins. Revenue implication of this
proposal is Rs.15.05 crores.
 117. Keeping in view the potential of the leather industry in the field of exports,
I am presenting a package of proposals relating to this industry. I propose to reduce
customs duties on specified machinery used for leather processing, footwear and other
leather goods manufacturing industries, from the general level of 8 1.5 per cent to 35
per cent ad valorem. I propose to fully exempt raw hides and skins, crust leather and
finished cattle leather from import duty. The existing exemption on wet blue leather is
also being made available on a long term basis. The import duty on wattle extract used
by the leather processing industry is being reduced from 87 per cent to 40 per cent ad
valorem. The proposals involve a revenue sacrifice of Rs.20.07 crores in a year.
 118. Some concessions were given in the last Budget and in January, 1985 on
imports of gem and jewellery machinery. I now propose to extend the concession to
certain components of gem and jewellery machinery and to some essential tools for
operating them. The revenue effect of this proposal is Rs.53 lakhs. I also propose to
continue the concessions given in the last Budget in respect of specified items of
machinery for food and meat processing and packaging.
 119. In order to give relief to the woollen textile industry, I propose to reduce
customs duty on raw wool from 50 per cent to 40 per cent ad valorem. This relief will
cost the exchequer Rs.4.80 crores in a year.
 120. Honourable Members would recall that a few months ago, Government
had extended a concessional rate of customs duty of 45 per cent in respect of
components to be imported for the manufacture of fuel efficient commercial vehicles
under a phased manufacturing programme. I propose to extend this conession to
warranty spares for such vehicles. In order to help indigenisation. of the parts of
commercial vehicles, I also propose to make the same concessional rate available to
coponents imported by specified ancillary industries. The concession is proposed to
be extended to components of fuel injection pumps and warranty spares imported by
 22

manufacturers of fuel injection pumps. Together, these concessions will cost the
exchequer Rs.24.7 crores in a year.
 121. I propose to totally exempt from customs duties certain advanced type of
computers not manufactured in the country. Simultaneously, customs duty on four
important components of computers is being further reduced from 75 per cent to 25
per cent ad valorem with a view to reducing the costs of the indigenous manufacturer
of computers. These proposals would involve a revenue sacrifice of Rs.20.40 crores.
 122. The demand of health and medical care has not escaped my attention. I
propose to reduce the duty on certain important items of medical equipment such as
Nuclear,Mapetic Resonance Scanner, CAT Scanner and Linear Accelerator, to 45 per
cent ad valorem. Three specified intermediates used in the manufacture of the anti-
T.B. and anti-Leprosy drug, Rifampicin, are being totally exempted from import duty.
I also propose to reduce the customs duty on eight other drug intermediates as also on
homoeopathic medicines. The revenue effect of these concessions is Rs.14.09 crores.
 123. Government has already exempted from the levy of customs duty scientific
and technical instruments, apparatus and appliances imported by research institutions
subject to certain conditions. As a measure of further encouragement to research in
the country, I propose to exempt from customs duty consumable items of research
materials to be imported by public-funded research institutions upto a value of
Rs.50,000/- in a year. This would entail a revenue sacrifice of about Rs.2.5 crores in
a year.
 124. In order to encourage domestic production of zip fasteners and discourage
their smuggling, I propose to fully exempt zip fasteners from excise duty. This is in
keeping with the other measures taken by me in this direction. Honourable Members
will recall that recently the import duty on watch components, horological machines
and raw materials was reduced, as also the excise duty on watches. This measure will
cost the exchequer Rs.3.07 crores.
 125. In this context, the Honourable Members are aware of the various measures
being taken by Government to tighten the implementation of anti-smuggling measures.
We have also recently announced a liberalised scheme of rewards and incentives in
this connection. I hope Honourable Members of the House will help to create a vibrant
public opinion which alone, in the ultimate analysis, can help to reduce and eliminate
the anti-national activities of smugglers.
 126. With a view to giving encouragement to our sports-men winning awards
in events of international significance, we have evolved a scheme by which they are
given suitable concessions in respect of taxes due on the awards.
 127. Certain changes in the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 are also proposed. The
details of these proposals are in the Budget papers.
 23

 128. Before I deal with my proposals in respect of excise duties, there is one
matter which I would like to mention. It relates to the recommendation of the Eighth
Finance Commission that there was scope for increasing the rates of stamp duty on
bills of lading, letters of credit and general insurance policies. I accordingly propose
to raise the rates of stamp duty on the instruments of bills of lading and letters of
credit. I propose, however, not to disturb the existing rates of stamp duty on general
insurance policies. The new rates of duties would be effective only from the 1st July,
1985. The accrual of additional revenue to the States and the Union territories during
the next financial year would be Rs.12.24 crores.
 129. Coming now to the excise duties, let me begin with my proposals for
additional resource mobilisation.
 130. The rate of duty in respect of item 68 of the excise tariff is being raised
from the existing level of 10 per cent to 12 per cent. This is likely to yield an additional
revenue of Rs.125 crores by way of central excise duties and Rs.60 crores by way of
countervailing duty in a full year. I must hasten to add that this increase will not affect
the raw materials and manufactured inputs which are intermediates, as the existing
provisions for the set off of the duty paid on goods falling under item 68 used in the
manufacture of other excisable goods, would continue.
 131. The excise duty on vegetable product which has been at a low level of 5
per cent for over 15 years is being raised to 10 per cent. This measure would fetch in
a full year additional revenue of Rs.70 crores.
 132. The basic excise duty on cement is being raised from Rs.205 per MT to
Rs.225 per MT for the common varieties of cement. This will result in an additional
revenue gain of Rs.66 crores on the excise side and Rs.1.60 crores on the customs side
by way of increase in the countervailing duty.
 133. Four new items are being introduced in the Excise tariff which will yield
additional revenue of Rs.19 crores in a year. The first three items are marble blocks,
slabs and tiles, travel goods and organic-chemicals. The last item is a preparation
containing betel nuts and any one or more of other ingredients such as lime, catechu,
cardamom, copra and menthol, put up for sale in unit containers’. Honourable Members
will recognize this ‘coalition’ as pan masala.
 134. The extent of duty differential enjoyed by mini steel plants is being reduced.
However, they will still have a duty advantage of Rs.50/- per MT. This measure is
expected to yield an additional revenue of Rs.18 crores in a full year.
 135. I propose to increase the basic excise duty on aerated waters from 25
paise to 30 paise per bottle of 200 ml. and on soda water from 5 paise to 10 paise per
bottle of 200 nil. There will be proportionate increase for bottles of higher capacity. I
also propose to increase the basic duty on crown corks from 2 paise to 5 paise per
 24

unit. These proposals are expected to yield an additional revenue of about Rs.16.75
crores in a full year.
 136. As a measure aimed at reducing evasion, I propose to provide for purely
specific rates of duty in respect of flat glass. I also propose to rationalise the tariff
structure relating to glass. These measures will result in a revenue gain of Rs.12.5
crores.
 137. I propose to raise the basic excise duty on printing and writing paper and
kraft paper, of specified varieties, by Rs.200/per MT. and to increase the basic excise
duty on certain speciality papers like coated paper, glassine paper and cigarette tissue.
The revenue gain from these measures will be Rs.10.50 crores.
 138. I propose to raise the total duty on biris from Rs.3.74 to Rs.4 per thousand,
on metal jacketed batteries from 20 per cent to 25 per cent ad valorem, and on storage
batteries from 15 per cent to 20 per cent. These measures are expected to result in a
revenue gain of Rs.16.84 crores.
 139. My next few proposals are rationalisation measures.
 140. The concessional rates applicable to veneer matches are being extended
to cardboard matches produced in the non-mechanised sector. The differential rates of
duty for use of cardboard in matches in the mechanised sector are dispensed with.
There will be only four rates of duty, namely, Rs.1.60, Rs.4.50, Rs.5.15, and Rs.6.85
per gross boxes as against the multiplicity of rates prevailing now. I hope this measure
will result in greater use of cardboard in place of wood in the non-mechanised sector.
 141. In the case of household, laundry and toilet soaps, duty rates depending
only on the value of the soap are being prescribed. The present limit of Rs.7,800 per
tonne for qualifying for the lower rate of duty is being raised to Rs.10,000 per tonne.
All soaps of value below Rs.10,000 per MT will be charged to concessional duty of 5
percent and other higher priced soaps will be charged to 15 per cent advalorem. There
will be an incidental revenue gain of about Rs.1 crore from this measure.
 142. In respect of gases and tubes and flaps of tyres, the present ad valorem
levies are being converted into specific rates to simplify the assessment procedures.
 143. I have also included in the Finance Bill some provisions designed to achieve
rationalisation, simplification and clarity in the tariff nomenclature in respect of
cosmetics and toilet preparations, iron and steel and non-ferrous metals. This measure
in the case of cosmetics and toilet preparations is estimated to result in a revenue gain
of about Rs.5 crores. There are certain other minor proposals with not much revenue
significance, which include revision of rates of duty in some cases and readjustment
of duties.
 144. My next two proposals are a measure of simplification as well as relief.
The first relates to special excise duty. This duty, as Honourable Members are aware,
 25

is levied as a percentage of the basic excise duty, the maximum being 10 per cent. The
present system entails maintenance of separate account in respect of this levy. As a
first step towards abolition of special excise duty, I propose to exempt as many as 100
items from this levy merging the special excise duty in some cases with the basic duty.
Only 32 items will now be subject to this levy. This measure will cost the exchequer
Rs.38.20 crores.
 145. The second proposal regarding simplification concerns the licence fee on
television sets, VCRs and radios. While the requirement of taking out a licence in the
case of radios, television sets and VCRs is being dispensed with, a new one-time levy
is being introduced on television sets alone at a uniform rate of Rs.100 per set in lieu
of the present Licence fee of Rs.50 payable every year till the T.V. set lasts. Hence
forth, people will not have to go to the post offices for taking out or renewing licences.
This levy would be an additional duty of excise, so far as T.V. sets manufactured in
India are concerned. The additional duty of excise collected from this will accrue to
the Centre only and will not be shareable with the States. Additional duty of customs
on equal amount would be levied on television sets when imported into India. The
collection on this account is expected to be Rs.18 crores in a year on the excise side
and Rs.2 crores on the customs side.
 146. I Now I come to my proposals regarding textiles. I propose to partly shift
the cotton fabrics duty to the yarn stage. Unprocessed cotton fabrics are being fully
exempted and duty burden on cotton yearn is being increased generally by about 25
per cent. However, cotton yarn in straight reel banks which is generally used by
handlooms will continue to be exempted. The concessional rates for yam in cross reel
hanks supplied to registered handloom cooperative societies, are also being continued.
Power processing of fabrics, whether in composite mills or elsewhere, will now attract
the same processing stage duty generally at a lower rate. While lowering the overall
rate, 1 have taken care to ensure that the additional duty component collected in lieu
of sales tax which goes to the States is increased. Exemption enjoyed by hand processors
is being continued. So also the exemption to handloom fabrics processed by approved
independent processors and registered handloom cooperative societies is being
continued.
 147. I also propose to fully exempt shoddy woollen blankets. Excise duty on
certain poIyester-wool blended fabrics is also being reduced.
 148. My proposals on excise duties relating to textiles would result in a revenue
loss of about Rs.13.85 crores in a full year.
 149. As Honourable Members are aware, substantial concessions in customs
duty have been accorded in the last two years to the electronics industry keeping in
view the growth potential of this industry. I have already referred to the concessions
in customs duty, in respect of computers. I propose to completely exempt computers
 26

from excise duty. I have also attempted to rationalise the existing excise tariff structure
in respect of different electronic items.
 150. In order to simplify assessment of excise duty on television sets, I propose
to fix specific rates of duty relatable to the size of the T.V. screen. While doing so, I
am also exempting from excise duty black and white television sets of screen size not
exceeding 36 cms.
 151. I These proposals will cost the exchequer Rs.7.72 crores in a year.
 152. I propose to increase the basic excise duty on commercial vehicles from
10 per cent to 15 per cent ad valorem and on three-axled vehicles from 7.5 per cent to
10 per cent ad valorem. This would yield about Rs.45 crores in a year. However, I
propose to provide for credit of the duty paid on tyres and batteries used in the
manufacture of all commercial vehicles including three-axled vehicles. I also propose
to allow a reduction of duty by 2 percentage points in respect of commercial vehicles
if such vehicles are turbo-charged. This concession will also be extended to passenger
cars if they are turbo-charged. These two proposals will cost the exchequer Rs.82
crores in a year. The net loss of revenue would, therefore, be Rs.37 crores. I hope
these measures would help manufacturers to reduce the prices of commercial vehicles.
 153. Honourable Members would recall that in the 1982 Budget, full exemption
was given to duplex paper board intended for lamination with low density polyethylene
and intended for packaging of milk. I propose to extend the concession to all varieties
of paper and paper board intended for lamination with low density polyethylene,
which should help in better utilisation and marketing of milk. I also propose to fully
exempt accessories of cycles and leather board from excise duty. These measures will
entail a revenue sacrifice of Rs.2. 10 crores in a full year.
 154. My last proposal relates to the excise duty exemption for the small scale
sector. As the Honourable Members are aware, the excise duty mechanism has been
used to encourage the growth of this sector. Under the present general scheme relating
to 67 specified groups of commodities, full exemption is available upto first clearances
of Rs.7.5 lakhs and clearances thereafter upto Rs.25 lakhs are charged to duty at 75
per cent of the duty otherwise payable. However, a unit whose clearances had exceeded
Rs.25 lakhs in the preceding financial year is not eligible for the concession. In order
to see that the cut-off limit of Rs.25 lakhs does not inhibit the growth of the small
scale sector, I propose to raise the eligibility limit to Rs.75 lakhs. I also propose to
further liberalise the scheme by providing for slab rates. For clearances between Rs.7.5
lakhs and Rs.15 lakhs the rate will be 25 per cent, for clearances between Rs.15 lakhs
and Rs.25 lakhs the rate will be 50 per cent and for clearances between Rs.25 lakhs
and Rs.40 lakhs the rate will be 75 per cent, of the duty otherwise payable. ‘Me
revised scheme envisages that even when a manufacturer exceeds the limit of Rs.40
lakhs, he does not lose the concessional rates applicable at the lower slabs, tin he
 27

exceeds Rs.75 lakhs. A similar scheme with some modifications is being introduced in
respect of goods falling under item 68.
 155. My proposals relating to the small scale sector entail a revenue sacrifice
of Rs.20 crores.
 156. My proposals in respect of customs and excise duties outlined above are
likely to yield additional revenue of Rs.707 crores from customs duties and Rs.424.29
crores from excise duties. The concessions and reliefs aggregate Rs.419.88 crores on
the customs side and Rs.164.75 crores on the excise side. The net additional revenue
from customs duties thus would be Rs.287.12 crores and that from excise duties
Rs.259.54 crores. In the excise duties, the Centre’s share would be Rs.139.59 crores
and that of the States Rs.119.95 crores. The Centre’s shares includes a sum of Rs.18
crores on account of additional excise duty on television sets. I would like to mention
that the States’ share has been calculated at the rate of 45 per cent of the net proceeds
from basic excise duties and that steps have been taken to increase the incidence of
additional duty in lieu of sales tax.
 157. Copies of notifications giving effect to the changes in customs and excise
duties effective from the 17th March, 1985, will be laid on the Table of the House in
due course.
 158. I had earlier mentioned that the Budget deficit at the existing rates of
taxes would be Rs.3660 crores. The proposed tax measures, taken together with reliefs
and concessions, are estimated to yield net additional revenue of Rs.311 crores to the
Centre and Rs.132 crores to the States during 1985-86. This will leave an uncovered
deficit of Rs.3349 crores. This deficit is lower than that in the current year and is
reasonable. I am confident that various policies and measures which we have proposed
will further stimulate the economy and contribute to the welfare of the common man.
 159. Let me end, Mr. Speaker, as I began, with the words of the late Prime
Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi: “We all have faith in new India. Let us put our shoulder
to the wheel”.
 [16th March, 1985]




 28

