 PART B
 46. I now turn to my tax proposals for 1995-96.
 47. Over the past three years, we have made a number of structural changes
in our tax laws covering both direct and indirect taxes. Unlike earlier isolated
attempts to modify the tax system, these changes were part of a medium term
programme of tax reform guided by certain general principles that have gained
wide acceptability. We wanted to build a structure which is simple, relies on moderate
tax rates but with a wider base and better enforcement, serves the objectives of
equity and provides the incentives and signals consistent with developing an
internationally competitive, dynamic economy.
 48. Direct taxation is the most equitable form of raising revenues, but our
experience in the earlier years of high tax rates showed that high rates did not lead
to high collections. I am happy to report that our decision to reduce rates and
thereby encourage compliance has yielded good results. Personal income and
corporation taxes, taken together, are expected to increase by more than 25 per
cent in 1994-95. The share of direct taxes in GDP has increased from 2.1 per cent
in 1990-91 to 2.8 per cent in 1994-95.
 49. In the area of customs duty our objective was to reduce the high rates

 12
of import duty gradually, so as to lower costs of production and improve
competitiveness of user industries while allowing domestic producers facing
competition from imported goods reasonable time to adjust. The strong growth of
Indian industry in 1994-95, to which I have referred earlier, demonstrates
conclusively that customs duty reforms have succeeded in imparting the necessary
dynamism to industrial production.
 50. In the area of excise duties, our objectives were to simplify the structure,
broaden the base, reduce high rates of duty which encourage evasion, shift to ad
valorem rates as far as possible and extend the coverage of MODVAT. The results
are evident in the impressive growth of excise revenues in 1994-95.
 51. I am reassured by these results that our basic strategy of tax reforms
stands fully vindicated. Together with administrative steps being taken to improve
revenue collection, I am now confident that we can create a tax structure which
will ensure buoyant revenues while also stimulating growth of production and
employment.
 52. Mr. Speaker Sir, after this brief overview, I would like to present the
details of my proposals relating to direct taxes.
 53. I have received many representations from Members of Parliament,
trade unions and others requesting for increase in the exemption limit for personal
income-tax. Our Government has consistently responded to the genuine needs of
the common man. I, therefore, propose to further raise the exemption limit for
income tax from Rs 35,000 at present, to Rs. 40,000.
 54. We need to strengthen incentives for savings. At present, under section
80L of the Income-tax Act, income by way of interest and dividend from certain
specified financial assets is exempt from income tax to the extent of Rs.10,000 per
annum. In order to provide greater fillip to domestic savings by individuals and
HUFs, I propose to raise this limit to Rs.13,000. This will provide both relief and an
added incentive for savers.
 55. With these changes, a salaried individual will not pay any tax upto a
salary level of Rs.55,000. In the case of working women, this limit is even higher at
Rs. 58,000. In addition, such an individual would benefit from an additional
exemption of Rs.13,000 if he or she takes full advantage of the exemption for
income from savings instruments under section 80 L. The tax exempt income could
therefore reach a maximum of Rs 68,000 generally and Rs 71,000 for working
women. It is only beyond this level that such individuals will start paying tax and
that too only at modest rates.
 56. Inadequate infrastructure is a key constraint to our economic progress.
In order to promote expansion of quality infrastructure, I propose to allow a five-
year tax holiday for any enterprise which builds, maintains and operates
infrastructure facilities in the area of highways, expressways and new bridges,
airports, ports and rapid mass transport systems. This tax holiday will be available
to enterprises which commence operation after 1st April,1995 . As an incentive to
financial institutions to provide long-term finance for development of such
infrastructure, I propose to allow a deduction of upto 40 per cent of their taxable
income derived from financing of these investments, provided this amount is credited
to a special reserve.

 13
 57. Under section 80-IA of the Income-tax Act, new industrial undertakings,
hotels and shipping concerns commencing operation before 31st March,1995 are
entitled to a deduction of 30 per cent of their income if they are companies or 25
per cent of their income if they are non-corporate entities. This incentive is available
to co-operative societies for the first 12 years, and to others for the first 10 years
of operation. As a special measure of support to small scale industries, I propose
to extend this concession to them for five more years. Thus, new industrial
undertakings in the small scale sector which commence operation before 31st
March, 2000 will be eligible for this concession.
 58. Exports of software have grown rapidly and represent a potentially
dynamic segment of export earnings. Software exporters have, however, represented
that the deduction under section 80HHE available to them is extended from year to
year whereas section 80HHC for export of goods is open-ended. I propose to accede
to their request to place section 80HHE on the same basis as section 80HHC.
 59. Venture capital funds can be an important instrument for promoting
growth of new firms and technologies which often involve high risk. The tax laws of
many countries allow income of such funds to be exempt from taxation in the
hands of the fund but tax it, after distribution, in the hands of the shareholders.
In order to encourage the formation of venture capital funds on similar lines in
India, I propose to exempt from tax, income by way of dividend and long term
capital gains from equity investments made by approved venture capital funds or
venture capital companies. Such venture capital funds will be required to invest
only in unlisted companies engaged in manufacturing. Income will, however, be
fully taxable in the hands of the shareholders.
 60. On Independence Day, 1994, the Prime Minister had announced the
launching of the Integrated Urban Poverty Eradication Programme. Under this
programme, the Ministry of Urban Development is setting up a National Urban
Poverty Eradication Fund (NUPEF). I propose to allow 100% deduction from income
in respect of contributions made to this fund.
 61. Under section 80-U of the Income-tax Act, a separate deduction of
Rs.20,000 is allowed from the total income of handicapped persons. I have received
several representations from handicapped persons and welfare organisations stating
that these individuals need additional relief on account of increased cost of medicines
and living aids. Recognising their needs, I propose to raise the level of deduction for
handicapped persons from Rs.20,000 at present to Rs.40,000.
 62. Many voluntary relief organisations have represented that the parents
or guardians of children with severe disability, such as spastic children, face great
mental agony having to worry about the burden of providing for the maintenance
of the disabled after the death of the parents or the guardian. I see merit in this
representation. I, therefore, propose to allow a new deduction of upto Rs. 20,000,
from the taxable income of parents or guardians of handicapped children provided
this amount is deposited in any approved scheme of LIC, UTI etc. for providing
recurring or lump sum payment for the maintenance and upkeep of a handicapped
dependant after the death of parents or the guardian.
 63. A number of funds have been established by trade unions for the

 14
welfare of the employees and their dependants. These funds are used to provide
cash benefits in the event of superannuation, illness or death or to meet the cost
of education of the employees’ children. I propose to exempt the income of such
funds from income tax.
 64. The National Minorities Development and Finance Corporation has been
set up in pursuance of the announcement made by the Prime Minister on
Independence Day, 1993. The main object of the Corporation is to promote economic
and developmental activities for the benefit of the members of the minority
communities. I propose to exempt from income tax the income of this corporation
as well as of similar corporations established by any State Government. I also
propose to allow deduction in respect of donations made to these corporations,
under section 80G of the Income-tax Act .
 65. Upgradation of human resources is a high priority. The fundamental
need is for improvement of primary and adult education in rural and semi-urban
areas where facilities for such education are deficient. In addition to public funding,
we have to encourage private contributions for this purpose. In 1993, I had extended
the benefit of 100% deduction from taxable income for donations to universities
and educational institutions of national eminence. This year, I propose to extend
100% deduction for donations to Zila Saksharta Samitis constituted in the districts
for the promotion of elementary education. This measure will help to mobilise
additional resources for elementary and adult education in rural and semi-urban
areas and enable us to intensify our total literacy campaign.
 66. All over the world, revenue administrations widen the tax base by
enlarging the scope of deduction of tax at source. This brings in more persons into
the tax net and assists the transition to lower rates of taxation. It also helps in the
reporting of correct incomes. In many countries, income from professional and
technical services is subject to deduction of tax at source. In order to prevent
under-reporting of income in this sector, I propose to introduce a new provision in
the Income-tax Act subjecting the sums payable by way of fees for professional or
technical services to the requirement of deduction of income-tax at source at the
rate of 10 per cent. There will be no deduction of tax at source where the aggregate
of payments or credits during the financial year is below Rs.20,000 or where
payments are made by individuals and HUFs.
 67. Tax is deducted at source on payments made in excess of Rs. 10,000,
to contractors under section 194C of the Income-tax Act. Legal disputes have arisen
whether the TDS provisions will apply to transport contracts, advertisement
contracts, broadcasting contracts, telecasting contracts and catering contracts. To
avoid further litigation and check tax avoidance, I propose to provide for deduction
of tax at source in these cases at the existing rate of 2 per cent for the main
contract and 1 per cent for sub-contracts. Taking into account the inflation over
the years, I also propose to raise the limit below which deduction at source is not
necessary from Rs.10,000 at present to Rs.20,000.
 68. The income from units of mutual funds or of the Unit Trust of India,
though liable to income-tax, is not subject to deduction of tax at source in most
cases. This has led to non-reporting or under-reporting of such income. In order to
prevent misuse and ensure a uniformity of treatment with other financial instruments

 15
I propose to provide for deduction of tax at source from such incomes at the rate
of 20 per cent in the case of companies and at the rate of 15 per cent for all others
including individuals and HUFs. There will be no change in the present tax treatment
of non-residents or offshore funds. In the case of resident unit-holders, deduction
of tax at source will be made only if the aggregate amount of income payable under
each scheme during a financial year exceeds Rs.10,000. No deduction of tax at
source will be required where units have been issued under an existing scheme
which provides for payment of a fixed amount after a certain period of time or
where post-dated cheques have already been issued towards payment of income.
 69. I also propose to provide for deduction of income-tax at source from
interest on time deposits with banks at the rate of 20 per cent plus surcharge in
the case of domestic companies and 10 per cent in the case of individuals and
other non-corporate entities. The new provision will be applicable only to the deposits
made on or after 1st July, 1995. No tax shall be deducted if the amount of interest
credited or paid during a financial year is Rs.10,000 or less branch-wise. Thus,
persons having small deposits will not be affected by the requirement of deduction
of tax. The existing facility of non-deduction of tax, where the recipient of interest
has no taxable income will also be available. Interest on time deposits with primary
co-operative credit societies, co-operative land mortgage banks and co-operative
land development banks will be outside the scope of this provision.
 70. Chapter XX C of the Income-tax Act empowers the Central Government
to make pre-emptive purchase of immovable properties, beyond a prescribed limit,
which, at present, is Rs.10 lakhs. A single monetary limit for all the notified cities
needs to be revised in the context of local variations in real estate prices. I, therefore,
propose to make a provision for prescribing different monetary limits for different
cities.
 71. Hon’ble Members are aware that the searches conducted by the Income
Tax Department are an important means of unearthing black money. However,
undisclosed incomes have to be related to the different years in which the income
was earned and as such assessments are unduly delayed. In order to make the
procedure more effective, I am proposing a new scheme under which undisclosed
income detected as a result of search shall be assessed separately at a flat rate of
60 per cent. An appeal against the order can be filed directly before the Income-Tax
Appellate Tribunal.
 72. In allowing deduction for depreciation, 100 per cent deduction is allowed
in the year of purchase for individual items of machinery or plant the value of
which does not exceed Rs.5,000, The written down value of such assets is thereafter
taken as nil. This provision was introduced as difficulties were experienced in
keeping record of items of small value for purposes of allowance of depreciation.
After switching over to the concept of block of assets with effect from 1st April,
1988, all the items of plant and machinery falling in a block are pooled together for
allowing depreciation at the prescribed rates. There is, therefore, no justification
for the continuance of this provision. I, accordingly, propose to provide that even
items of machinery or plant costing less than Rs. 5,000 will form part of a ‘block
of assets’ and depreciation will be allowed on the same at the rate specified in the
Income-tax Rules.

 16
 73. I propose to amend the provisions of the Income-tax Act to provide that
the taxable income may be computed only on cash or mercantile basis. It is also
being provided that the taxpayers shall follow accounting standards as may be
notified by the Central Government from time to time for various businesses. This
provision is being made applicable from accounting year starting from 1st April,1996.
 74. The calculation of capital gains on sale of bonus shares has led to
several disputes. In order to simplify the position and avoid disputes, I propose
that the cost of bonus shares for calculating the capital gains tax shall be taken at
nil.
 75. I now turn to my proposals regarding indirect taxes.
 76. The thrust of my proposals is to continue the strategy of tax reform we
have followed and reduce the cost of inputs to Indian producers, simplify the tax
structure, minimize anomalies, promote competition and efficiency, lower prices
paid by Indian consumers and thereby check the potential for inflation.
 77. I shall deal first with import duties. The present peak rate of import
duty of 65% is still very high compared to other developing countries, let alone
industrialised nations. I propose to continue the process of phased reduction in the
peak rate by lowering it to 50%.
 78. The machinery and capital goods sector is a critical sector of our industry
and it has responded extremely well to the new policies with a growth of 25% in
April-November, 1994. I propose a package of measures which will further rationalise
and simplify the import duty structure as applicable to machinery and capital
goods, remove a number of anomalies and assist the industry in achieving a high
rate of growth.
 · At present the general import duty rate on machinery items is 25% but
 certain capital goods like generating sets and weighing machinery attract
 higher rate of duty. I am proposing to bring down the duty on these items
 also to 25%.
 · The rate of import duty on machine tools, currently varies between 35%
 and 45%. I propose to unify the duty rates at 25% which is the general
 rate for machinery. Parts of such machine tools will also generally attract
 duty of 25%.
 · Components of capital goods generally attract an import duty of 25% but
 components which contain electronic parts and components which are
 interchangeable with motor vehicle parts, attract higher rates. I propose
 to reduce the duty rate on these components to 25%.
 · Quality control is a must for manufacturing industries if they have to
 improve the quality of their products. I am proposing to reduce the import
 duty on testing, quality control and other instruments from present rates
 varying from 40% to 60% to a uniform level of 25%. Parts of such
 instruments in general will also attract the same rate.
 79. These proposals will unify the customs duty rates for nearly 80% of
general machinery (both mechanical and electrical), machine tools, instruments

 17
and projects at 25%. They will avoid anomalies relating to parts and components,
reduce classification disputes and promote investment by reducing its cost.
 80. Metals, ferrous and non-ferrous, are key inputs into capital goods and
many other lines of production, many of which are undertaken by small scale
producers. These items at present attract rates of duty varying from 50% to 60%.
Ideally, such materials should not attract rates of duty higher than those on the
capital goods. But keeping in view the need to allow domestic producers of metals
a reasonable transition period, I am proposing to reduce the import duty rates on
ferrous and non-ferrous metals to 40%. For unwrought non-ferrous metals like
copper, zinc and lead, the import duty is proposed to be reduced to 35%. Import
duty on hot rolled coils of iron and steel for re-rolling is proposed to be reduced
from 40% to 30%, and that on stainless steel scrap from 30% to 20%. Import duty
on sponge iron is proposed to be reduced from 30% to 20%. I also propose to
reduce the import duty on a number of non-metallic minerals from 65% to 30%.
 81. I am also simplifying the import duty structure on ball or roller bearings
which currently attract different rates of duty depending on size, weight and
description. Henceforth all ball or roller bearings will attract a uniform duty of 25%
+ Rs. 120/kg.The revised duty structure is likely to reduce the incentive for under-
invoicing and smuggling.
 82. Clothing and textiles are items of mass consumption. Yet our import
duties on raw materials and inputs used to manufacture synthetic yarns, fibres
and fabrics are on the high side. In view of this, and keeping in mind the continuing
inflationary pressure in this sensitive area, I propose to reduce import duty on
xylenes from 30% to 10% to lower the cost of manufacturing DMT/PTA. I am also
proposing to reduce the import duty on DMT, PTA and MEG, being essential raw
materials for the manufacture of polyester fibre and polyester filament yarn, from
60% to 35%. On caprolactum, a basic raw material for nylon, the import duty is
proposed to be reduced from 60% to 45%. These changes should substantially
reduce input costs to the user industries. To help ensure that the benefits are
reflected in the prices of the final products, I also propose to reduce the import
duty on synthetic fibres and filament yarns to 45% ad valorem.
 83. I am also proposing to reduce the import duty on certain chemicals
widely used in industry. On basic feed stocks like ethylene and benzene, the import
duty is being reduced from 15% to 10%. On soda ash, caustic soda and linear alkyl
benzene, the import duty is being reduced from 65% to 40%. On certain chemical
intermediates like acrylonitrile, the import duty is being reduced from 30% to 20%.
I am proposing to reduce the import duty on molasses from 65% to 10% to help the
alcohol based chemical industries. The duty on LPG is also being reduced from
15% to 10%.
 84. Electronics is a fast growing industry offering great promise for exports,
employment and development in the small scale sector. In my last budget, I had
conducted a major restructuring of duties to promote growth of this industry. As a
further step in this direction, I propose to reduce the import duty on specified raw
materials and piece parts from the present levels of 20% and 30% to a uniform
level of 15%, on electronic components including printed circuit boards and colour
monitor tubes from 40% to 25%, on populated printed circuit boards from 50%

 18
and 65% to 35% and on computers, from 65% to 40%. I am also proposing to
reduce the import duty on integrated circuits and hard disc drives to 25% which is
likely to reduce the grey market in these products. Import duty on picture tubes for
colour TVs is being reduced from 65% to 40%. To give a boost to the telecom optical
fibre cable industry, I propose to reduce the import duty on optical fibres from 40%
to 35%. I am also proposing to reduce the import duty on both systems and
application software to a uniform level of 10% only. With these changes in duty
structure, I expect this industry to show even more dynamism in future.
 85. For promoting healthcare, last year I had simplified the import duty
structure on medical equipment, exempted many types of life saving equipment
from payment of duty, and abolished the certification procedure for availing of the
exemption for charitable hospitals. In order to help manufacture and maintenance
of medical equipment, I am extending the benefit of full exemption from import
duty to all parts of exempted life saving and sight saving equipment . Some crucial
spare parts of other dutiable medical equipment such as populated PCB will attract
an import duty of 15%. I am also proposing to fully exempt linear accelerators,
which are vital for the treatment of cancer patients. There are also proposals for
reduction of import duty on a large number of drug intermediates from 50% to
40%.
 86. Our printing industry needs quality paper so as to establish a foothold
in the international field. With this in view, I am proposing to reduce the import
duty on paper from 65% to 40%.
 87. To promote exports of finished leather and make it more competitive,
I propose to abolish the export duty on finished leather.
 88. Agriculture is the lynchpin of our economy and employs two thirds of
our labour force. In order to help agriculture and allied sectors directly, I propose
reducing import duties on certain items. I am proposing to reduce the import duty
on grand parent poultry stock from 30% to 20%. On certain drugs used as feed mix
for poultry, the duty is being reduced from 65% to 15%. For the fishing industry,
I propose to reduce the import duty on certain vaccines, prawn feed mix and
preparations for prawn processing from 65% to 15%. Agriculture and allied sectors
will also be helped by the general reduction in import duties on general machinery
and components. I have, however, proposed an increase in import duty on malt
and starch from 10% to 30%, that on silk cocoon from 30% to 40% and on oleopine
resins from 10% to 20% in order to give necessary protection to these sectors.
 89. I propose to raise the free baggage allowance for passengers coming to
India from Rs. 4000 to Rs.6000. Beyond this limit, the duty rate now is 100%
which I propose to reduce to 80%. I hope this will provide welcome relief to our
people working abroad and to travellers in general. At present import of goods
through a courier attracts import duty at the rate of 100% upto Rs.10,000/-and
200% thereafter. There has been a long standing demand from industry that goods
imported through a courier should be charged at the relevant rate for the item
being imported. I am making a provision to this effect in the Finance Bill. Pending
passage of the Legislation, I am proposing that goods imported by a courier will
attract a duty of 80% without any value limit.

 19
 90. I now turn to my proposals for excise duties.
 91. In my earlier budgets, I had exempted from excise duty a large number
of items of common consumption like processed food, dairy products, jam, jelly,
butter, cheese, tea and coffee. Many other items of mass consumption like cooking
oil, bicycles and their tyres, kerosene stoves, bread, spices and household utensils
are also exempt from excise duty. My proposals in this budget will further reduce
the burden of excise duties on articles which are widely consumed.
 92. A number of articles of mass use are made of plastics. Plastics are also
finding increasing use in agriculture and agro-processing. The present rate of duty
on this basic material is 30%. I propose to bring down the rate of duty on plastics
to 25%. On the dutiable articles made from plastics also, I propose to reduce the
excise duty to 25%. However, articles of plastics which are exempt at present will
continue to be so. These measures are being combined with a reduction in the
import duty on bulk plastics from rates varying between 45% and 65% to a uniform
rate of 40%.
 93. At present, we have a uniform excise duty of 15% on all metals except
aluminum. I now propose to reduce the excise duty on aluminum also from 20% to
15%.
 94. In order to remove areas of dispute in classification and to rationalise
the duty structure, I propose a uniform excise duty of 15% on parts of capital
goods as against present rates which vary from 10% to 25%. This will avoid disputes
as to whether a particular item should be considered as an article of metal or
component of a machinery.
 95. I am also proposing a concessional rate of excise duty of 10% on
glassware produced by the labour intensive mouth blown process as against the
present rate of 20%.
 96. Many Honourable Members of Parliament have suggested that there
are certain sectors of the industry which are both highly labour intensive and
belong to the unorganised sector and that they deserve complete exemption from
excise duty. Having regard to these requests, I propose to exempt the following
from excise duty:-
 - HDPE and polypropylene mono-filaments which are mainly used for making
 fishing nets and mosquito nets;
 - metal containers made without the aid of power;
 - non-elastic narrow woven fabrics of cotton;
 - unbranded surgical bandages; and
 - tarpaulin cloth made without the aid of power.
 97. As part of the process of reducing higher end duty rates, I am proposing
to lower excise duty:-
 - on aerated water from 50% to 40%;

 20
 - on air conditioning machinery from 60% to 40%;
 - on cosmetics from 50% to 40%;
 - on glazed tiles from 40% to 30%.
 - on perfumed antiseptic cream from 30% to 20%.
 98. I am also proposing reduction in excise duty in certain areas of general
consumption -
 - on polymer based paints from 30% to 20%;
 - on cocoa and cocoa preparations from 25% to 20%;
 - on malt based food preparations from 25% to 20%;
 - on asbestos fibres from 20% to 10%;
 - on asbestos cement articles from 30% to 25%.
 - on audio and video magnetic tapes from 30% to 20%;
 - on dry cell batteries from 25% to 20%;
 - on coated fabrics from 35% to 25%;
 - on ceramic laboratory ware from 30% to 20%.
 - on fireworks from 20% to 15%.
 - on parts of motor vehicles and two-wheelers from 20% to 15%.
 - on glass containers from 30% to 20%.
 99. I propose to reduce the excise duty on polyester filament yarn from
69% to 57.5%. The rate is still high but revenue constraints rule out any further
reduction for the present. The concurrent reduction in import duties, indicated
earlier, will help ensure that the benefit of excise duty reduction is passed on to
consumers.
 100. The textured polyester yarn industry has complained about the burden
of excise duty of 69% on the value addition in their industry. I am proposing
suitable adjustment in the tariff value of textured yarn so as to reduce the total
duty burden at the texturising stage from Rs. 10.35/kg to Rs.4.60/kg. On sewing
thread which currently attracts excise duty at rates varying from 23% to 69%, I am
proposing a uniform duty of 23%.
 101. I have some proposals which are in the nature of anti-evasion measures.
I am proposing an excise duty of 10% on wool tops so as to check evasion of excise
duty at the woollen yarn stage. As full Modvat credit will be available, the tax will
fall only on those who are evading excise duty at the yarn stage. I am also proposing
a minimum excise duty of Rs. 10 per kilo on waste and scrap of fibre and yarn so
as to discourage the tendency to clear good quality fibre and yarn in the guise of
waste. It is also being clarified that yarn made predominantly from synthetic waste
will attract the same rate of duty as yarn made from staple fibre.
 102. Insulated wires and cables attract a duty of 30%. As these have wide
household and industrial application, I am proposing to reduce the duty to 25%.

 21
 103. There is a persistent demand from the plastic woven bags manufacturers
for extending Modvat to the users of such bags. I am now proposing that users of
such plastic bags as well as jute bags be allowed full credit of excise duty paid on
such bags. Cement industry is one of the major consumers of such bags. I am
simultaneously proposing a modest increase in excise duty on cement from Rs.330
to Rs.350/MT for integrated cement plants and Rs. 185 to Rs. 200/MT for mini
cement plants. For the mini cement plants using vertical shaft kilns, the daily
clearance limit is also being raised from 200 to 300 MT per day.
 104. Certain items of china and porcelain ware attract a duty of 30% which
is on the high side for a product which is increasingly of common use. With a view
to giving relief to the consumers, I am proposing to reduce the duty to 15%.
 105. Small scale units play a significant role in the economy of the country.
Currently, only units whose turnover of dutiable goods did not exceed Rs. 2 crore
in the preceding financial year are eligible for the concessional rates of excise duty
under the general small scale industry exemption scheme. I have received
representations that the present limit of Rs. 2 crore is too low and that it acts as
a disincentive to future growth. I am thus proposing to raise the eligibility limit for
availing of the SSI exemption scheme to Rs. 3 crore.
 106. There has been a perpetual problem with manufacturers of exempted
goods as they may have to pay excise duty on waste and scrap generated during
the process of manufacture. It does not seem very logical to bring these units
under the excise control only for the purpose of charging duty on such waste and
scrap. I am thus proposing to fully exempt waste and scrap which arise in the
manufacture of exempted goods. This should help a large number of units in the
small scale sector.
 107. I am also proposing abolition of the system of filing of classification
lists. From 1st May, 1995, the manufacturers need not file any classification list
before clearing goods from the factory.
 108. There have been requests from trade and industry for liberalisation
and simplification of Modvat scheme. With this end in view, I am proposing the
following relaxations in the Modvat Rules-
 - Allowing Modvat credit for specified quality control, testing, pollution control
 and R&D equipment;
 - Utilisation of Modvat credit for payment of duty on any goods notified
 under the Modvat scheme;
 - Allowing Modvat credit for furnace oil and low sulphur heavy stock used
 for generation of power in a factory manufacturing excisable goods.
 109. I am also proposing to extend Modvat for tyre yarn used in tyres by
imposing a duty of 20% on the intermediate tyre cord fabrics. To make up for the
revenue loss, the specific rates of duty on tyres are being raised by about 8%.
Excise duty on tyres for two wheeled and three wheeled vehicles is, however, not
being raised.
 110. I am proposing extension of Modvat scheme to industrial fabrics. In
the case of woollen fabrics also, I am proposing to extend Modvat fully, as such
fabrics already attract basic excise duty and enjoy limited Modvat facilities.

 22
 111. I am also proposing to broadly align the Central Excise Tariff on textiles
on the lines of the harmonised system of nomenclature. This will help reduce
classification disputes.
 112. Consonant with the increase in prices, I am proposing an increase in
the existing specific rates of duty on cigarettes by about 7%.
 113. I have also proposed certain amendments in the Finance Bill seeking
to effect changes in the Customs Act, the Central Excises and Salt Act and excise
and customs tariffs. These include certain consequential amendments to the customs
tariff based on the amendments to the Harmonised Commodity Description and
Coding System which has been adopted by our country in terms of International
Convention on the Harmonised System. The amendments are merely enabling
provisions and do not have significant revenue implications. In order to save the
time of the House, I do not propose to recount them.
 114. The increases in excise duties are expected to lead to a revenue gain of
Rs. 335 crore while the reliefs will amount to Rs. 646 crore in a full year. Of the
total net loss of Rs. 311 crore, the loss to the Centre will be Rs.203 crore and that
to the States Rs.108 crore. On the customs side, the proposals would result in a
revenue loss of Rs. 1179 crore. Applying conventional methods of estimation, the
proposed changes in direct taxes are expected to lead to a revenue loss of about
Rs.900 crore on account of Income tax, of which the loss to the States would be
about Rs.700 crore. Total net loss to the Centre would thus be Rs. 1582 crore.
 115. These methods do not take adequate account of the gains from
simplification, rationalisation and improved tax compliance. Last year, the net loss
from the revenue proposals on the basis of conventional estimates was placed at
more than Rs. 4000 crore. However, I had predicted that because of gains from
compliance and better administration our revenues would not suffer any loss. This
optimism has been fully justified by performance as indicated in the Revised
Estimates for 1994-95. The tax changes I have proposed in the budget are essentially
a continuation of the efforts made in the previous year and I am confident that the
gains from the reform will ensure that there will be no revenue loss. I am not,
therefore, assuming any revenue losses from my Budget proposals. Hence the
fiscal deficit will remain at 5.5% of GDP.
 116. Copies of notifications giving effect to the changes in customs and
excise duties will be laid on the Table of the House in due course.
 117. Honourable members may recall that in my first Budget Speech, I had
affirmed that no power on earth could stop an idea whose time had come. I had
also stated that the emergence of India as a major economic power was such an
idea. It is this vision, of a resurgent India, taking her rightful place as an economic
power house in Asia, which has inspired our economic policies. Our Government
has worked hard to convert this vision into a reality, and I think the House will
agree with me that our efforts have met with considerable success. We have sought
to mobilise the collective will of our people for development through an action
programme which commits us to the twin pursuit of excellence and social justice.
There is no parallel example in the world of a country of India’s size and diversity
seeking to bring about a massive social and economic transformation in the
framework of a democratic polity and an open society committed to the rule of law
and individual freedom. India’s experience is, therefore, of great worldwide

 23
significance. The world is certainly watching us with interest and expectation.
 118. As I see it, India is on the threshold of unprecedented opportunities
provided we have the wisdom to seize them. We have made a good beginning but
there is still a vast unfinished agenda. We have to persevere in our efforts. This will
call for hard work and dedication and a measure of self-discipline on the part of all
sections of society. We must never forget that a higher standard of living for our
people can become a reality only through an all round increase in productivity.
Clearly there are no short cuts to it. We cannot simply spend our way into prosperity.
Those of us in politics have a special responsibility. The pursuit of competitive
politics must not be allowed to distract our people’s attention from the basic task
of nation building. Politics in this country must recapture the spirit of idealism and
self sacrifice, which inspired our freedom struggle, and become a purposeful
instrument of social change. This then is no time for rest or to fritter away our
energies in partisan strife. It is a time for rededication and reaffirmation of our
collective solemn resolve to work tirelessly for building a new India worthy of the
dreams of the founding fathers of our Republic, an India which will enable our
children and grand children to lead a life of dignity and self respect, to take pride
in being Indian and to grapple effectively with the challenges of the twenty-first
century.
 119. Mr. Speaker, Sir, with these words I commend this Budget to this
august House.
 [15th March, 1995]

