 PART B
 64. In framing these proposals, I have tried to take into account the realities
of the economic situation to which I referred at the beginning of my speech. While
doing so, I hope I have not been entirely unmindful of a certain forthcoming event
which is of importance to all of us in this Parliament.
 65. Mr. Speaker, Sir, my first proposal relates to the non-corporate income-
tax sector. I propose to revise substantially the entire rate structure relating to personal
taxation. The present rate of tax in the first slab of taxable income ranging from
Rs.15,001 to Rs.20,000 is 25 per cent. The House will recall that this rate was brought
down last year from the then prevailing level of 30 per cent. I now propose to reduce
this rate further to 20 per cent. Relief has been allowed at all income levels above
Rs.20,000 also. The maximum marginal rate of tax on incomes over Rs.1 lakh is
being reduced from 60 per cent to 55 per cent. The new rates in some illustrative
slabs will be as follows: in the income slab of Rs.25,001 to Rs.30,000, the new rate
will be 30 per cent as against 35 per cent at present; in the income slab of Rs.50,001
to Rs.60,000, the new rate will be 45 per cent as against 50 per cent at present; and in
the income slab of Rs.70,001 to Rs.80,000 the new rate will be 50 per cent as against
55 per cent at present.
 66. The above proposal will provide relief at all levels of incomes. Taken
with the increase in the standard deduction introduced last year, I expect this measure
will provide substantial relief in particular to the fixed income groups. The revised
tax schedule will provide a relief in tax of Rs.281/- to a taxpayer with an income of
Rs.20,000, which is 20 per cent of the tax payable by him earlier. For an income level
of Rs.30,000, the relief will be Rs.844/- or 16.67 per cent of the tax payable under the
old structure, and at income level of Rs.50,000, this relief will be 10 per cent of the
tax payable.
 67. The loss of revenue in the proposed rate schedule, assuming no change in
the number of taxpayers and the assessed incomes in different income slabs, is
calculated at Rs.180 crores. However, lowering of the tax rates should normally be
expected to lead to an increase in the coverage of taxpayers in different tax slabs and
also better tax compliance. Taking these factors into account, I have assumed a net
 13

revenue loss of Rs.59 crores only. This loss is entirely attributable to tax relief provided
to the fixed income groups. As far as business and professional incomes are concerned,
I have assumed that the reduction in the rates will encourage better compliance and
reporting and that this will partly cover the revenue loss.
 68. This proposal, Mr. Speaker, Sir, in a way continues the tax rationalisation
programme that was started by my Party in 1974; carried forward in 1976 and further
reinforced after we came back to power in 1980. The present tax structure has also
been brought down to a level which I regard as realistic and entirely appropriate. I
hope this measure will have a salutary effect on our tax culture and will induce the
maximum number of taxpayers to come forward and voluntarily declare their true
incomes.
 69. At the same time, it is necessary to simplify tax administration and make
it more responsive to the needs of the taxpayers. One essential feature would be the
effort to complete assessments within the shortest possible time. As the Hon’ble
Members are aware, the scope of the summary assessment scheme covers incomes
upto Rs.1 lakh. Only a percentage of cases with incomes in this range is being
scrutinised, the selection of such cases being on random sampling basis. The target
for 1983-84 is to complete 85 per cent of the summary assessments workload. I have
instructed the Income Tax Department to further speed up the assessments.
 70. For some years, the Income-tax Act has contained provisions empowering
the Central Government to acquire immovable property having a fair market value
exceeding Rs.25,000. This power is exercisable in situations where the declared
consideration for transfer of the property is less than the fair market value of the
property. To eliminate unproductive work in handling a large number of relatively
small value cases and also taking into account the rise in market prices I have modified
the provision to say that this power will be exercised only in cases where the fair
market value exceeds Rs.50,000. As a further simplification it is being provided that
the prescribed statement will have to be filed before the registering officer only in
cases where the value of consideration for the transfer exceeds Rs.25,000 as against
Rs.10,000 at present.
 71. With the reduction in rates and expeditious disposal of assessments, I
believe there can now be no excuse for any leniency to be shown to those who abuse
our laws. Such cases will necessarily have to be dealt with severely. In order to
discourage tax avoidance and tax evasion, I am also introducing some further measures.
In all cases where the annual turnover exceeds Rs.20 lakhs or where the gross receipts
from a profession exceed Rs.10 lakhs, I am providing for a compulsory audit of
accounts. This is intended to ensure that the books of account and other records are
properly maintained and faithfully reflect the true income of the taxpayer. I am also
proposing that loans or deposits of Rs.10,000 or more shall be taken or accepted only
by crossed cheque or bank draft.
 14

 72. I find that the existing provisions of the Income-tax Act provide that no
suit to enforce any right relating to any property held benami can be instituted in any
court by a person claiming to be the legal owner unless he has declared the Income
from such property in any return of income or the value of such property in any return
of net wealth or furnished a notice in this behalf in the prescribed form to the Income-
tax Officer. Such return or notice can at present be given at any time before the suit
is filed. With a view to curbing the practice of benami holding of property I am
proposing that it will henceforth be obligatory in all cases to give notice to the
Commissioner of Income-tax in the prescribed form within one year of the acquisition
of the property. This amendment will enable the Department to initiate appropriate
action in respect of such benami acquisition of property well before the limitation for
such action expires.
 73. Having dealt with the non-corporate sector, I now turn my attention to the
corporate sector. The tax rates for this sector are not being changed. I am however
providing one facility. Last year, while raising the surcharge payable by companies
from 2.5 per cent to 5 per cent, I had given companies the option to make deposits of
the additional surcharge with the Industrial Development Bank of India. I am now
further providing that companies can henceforth exercise this option in respect of the
entire amount of the surcharge payable by them. These resources will flow back to
the corporate sector, and will be available for modernisation. In the earlier part of my
speech, I have already referred to the decision to reduce the interest rates on loans
upto Rs.4 crores being extended by IDBI under the soft loan scheme.
 74. Representations had been received from various quarters that the ceiling
on the deductible amount of managerial remuneration as contained in the Income-tax
Act is low and should be raised. I am glad to inform the House that having regard to
the changes in the managerial remuneration introduced by the Department of Company
Affairs, I am also raising the ceiling limits for managerial salaries from Rs.5,000 to
Rs.7,500 per month. The ceiling in respect of perquisites will however remain
unchanged.
 75. Some relaxations are also being provided to those engaged in the business
of growing, and manufacturing tea. The existing provisions provide exemption from
tax only in respect of subsidy received for replantation or replacement of tea bushes.
I am extending this tax exemption to cover subsidy received for other approved schemes
relating to rejuvenation and consolidation of areas. I hope this measure will further
lend support to our scheme for increasing production of tea.
 76. My next proposal, I believe, will be welcomed by a large number of
people. Investors presently can receive dividends and interest on debentures without
deduction of tax at source, if they furnish an exemption certificate from the Income-
tax Officer or alternatively file a declaration to the effect that their income for the year
is below the exemption limit. To reduce paper work and avoid inconvenience to small
 15

investors, I propose to provide that widely-held companies may, henceforth, pay interest
on debentures and dividend income upto Rs.1,000 without deduction of tax at source
provided that the payment is made by an account payee cheque or a bank draft.
 77. Mr. Speaker, Sir, I notice that certain provisions of tax laws are being
misused by a section of the taxpayers. I had occasion last year to deal at some length
with taxation of charitable and religious trusts and institutions. I find that some of
these trusts and institutions are trying to circumvent the investment pattern for trust
funds laid down by the Finance Act, 1983. It is necessary to ensure that all such trusts
and institutions strictly conform to the prescribed investment pattern and that such
income or property is not used for providing benefit to the settlors, trustees, etc. I,
therefore, propose to provide for taxation of the Income of defaulting trusts and
institutions at the maximum marginal rate of income-tax.
 78. While on this subject, I would like to refer to a tendency noticed to create
private trusts which carry on business. To curb such practice, I propose to provide
that where such trusts have profits and gains of business, the entire income of the trust
will be charged to tax at the maximum marginal rate, an exception being made only in
the cases where the trust is created by will for dependent relatives.
 79. Another undesirable practice noticed is the tendency of some corporate
bodies to make large contributions to the so-called welfare funds. I further understand
that utilisation of these funds is discretionary and subject to no discipline. I am,
therefore, providing that deductions will be available only in respect of contributions
to such funds as are established under statute or an approved provident fund,
superannuation fund or gratuity fund. I am making this change with retrospective
effect to avoid unnecessary litigation.
 80. Last year, I liberalised the scheme related to export turnover. I propose to
continue it and watch its operation for a longer period of time.
 81. Last year, I had also referred to a large variety of exemptions and deductions
that had been built into our tax system over time. While each deduction by itself may
have its own merits, the aggregate effect was to complicate the tax administration and
to provide loopholes for tax avoidance or tax evasion, as also for litigation. I had,
therefore, initiated a process of review and, where necessary, doing away with
concessions which had outlived their utility. I intend to carry this process further.
 82. Our experience has shown that an expenditure related concession leads to
a tendency to inflate expenditure and hence it should have no place in our tax system.
Therefore, I propose to withdraw all weighted deductions as are available under the
different provisions. The expenditure actually incurred will, of course, continue to
qualify for deduction. Only the benefit of weightage will no longer be available.
 83. I am also withdrawing the exemptions available under sections 33B, 35C,
8OCC, 80D and 80E of the Income-tax Act. These deductions, notwithstanding their
 16

apparent laudable objectives have either been open to misuse or have benefited only
a few. The revenue involved is marginal. I am also reducing the quantum of exemption
available under Sections 80M, 8ON and 80-0.
 84. Now, I intend to announce a few concessions in respect of the Wealth-tax
Act. Hon’ble Members, I am sure, will be happy to hear that the monetary ceiling of
exemption in respect of one house owned by a taxpayer is being increased from the
present level of Rs.1 lakh to Rs.2 lakhs. This is being done to take into account the
increase in market value. I am also proposing to raise the exemption limit in respect
of specified financial assets from the present level of Rs.1,65,000 to Rs.2,65,000.
Together with separate exemption of Rs.35,000 available in respect of units of the
Unit Trust of India and proposed to be extended to deposits under the National Deposit
Scheme, the aggregate exemption in respect of the value of specified financial assets
will rise to Rs.3 lakhs as against the present ceiling of Rs.2 lakhs. Honourable Members
would recall that in the earlier part of my speech, I had referred to the success in
mobilising savings in the form of financial assets; I hope that this change will give
further impetus to it.
 85. The other changes proposed by me in respect of direct taxes are of relatively
minor nature and I would not like to take the valuable time of this House by elaborating
them.
 86. After adjustment of the gain to revenue on account of withdrawal or
modification of certain concessions, my proposal in regard to Income-tax will lead to
a net loss of Rs.75 crores, of which the loss to the Centre would be Rs.36.32 crores
and the loss of the States would be Rs.38.68 crores.
 87. Mr. Speaker, Sir, I shall now deal with my proposals in the area of indirect
taxes. Here my main objective has been to provide further impetus to the growth of
Indian industry through tariff adjustments and substantial relief in excise duties in
carefully selected areas. I have also kept in view the need to reduce prices of certain
items for consumers and contain the rate of inflation in the economy. I am sure the
Honourable Members will not grudge, if in doing so, I have also taken a little care of
Government revenues.
 88. My principal proposal relating to customs duties is with regard to auxiliary
duty of customs. The levy imposed on an annual basis since the 1973 Budget is
proposed to be continued upto the 31st of March, 1985. I also propose to raise, with
certain exceptions, the present effective rates by 5 percentage points. I am excluding
from the proposed increase essential items like fertilizers, bulk petroleum products
such as kerosene and high-speed diesel oil, and also newsprint. Fuller details of these
proposals are available in the Budget papers. This proposal is expected to yield an
additional revenue of Rs.241.73 crores in a full year.
 89. The present customs duty on crude petroleum of Rs.9.50 per metric tonne
(which is being collected by way of auxiliary duty) was fixed in 1973. Without
 17

affecting the domestic prices of petroleum products, I propose to raise the duty on
crude to Rs.100 per metric tonne. The revenue gain from this measure will be Rs.132.76
crores. This duty, increase is to be absorbed by the oil companies without their having
to raise consumer prices on this account.
 90. The current rates of Import duties on iron and steel Items were fixed a
few years back and they are now out of line with the requirements of Indigenous
industry. I propose to raise the basic customs duty on different items of iron and steel
(other than stainless steel) by 5 percentage points or 10 percentage points, depending
upon the existing rates of duties. I also propose to levy a total customs duty of 20
percent ad valorem on stainless steel melting scrap, which is presently exempt from
customs duty. These measures are expected to yield an additional revenue of Rs.84.
20 crores.
 91. I also propose to increase the import duty on zip fasteners and parts thereof,
magnetic tape and petroleum specialities, namely petroleum jelly, sodium petroleum
sulfonate and liquid paraffin. Details of the proposals are available in the Budget
papers. The revenue gain in these proposals would be of the order of Rs.5.32 crores.
 92. In order to promote exports in the important sector of gems and jewellery,
customs duties leviable on a number of gem and jewellery processing and manufacturing
machines are proposed to be reduced from the respective existing rates to 40 per cent
ad valorem. The gem processing machines would enable significant reduction in
processing losses and also improve overall quality and productivity. Similarly, I also
propose to reduce customs duties on specified machines used in packaging of food
articles as well as by meat and food processing industries from the respective existing
rates to 40 per cent ad valorem. This measure is expected to encourage export of food
items in value-added form and also in consumer packs instead of in bulk. The revenue
sacrifice involved in the above proposals is of the order of Rs.5.24 crores.
 93. With the advancement in machine tool technology, CNC machines are
progressively replacing conventional machine tools due to their higher productivity
and accuracy. To enable the indigenous machine tool manufacturers to offer CNC
machine tools on competitive terms, I propose to reduce the customs duty on CNC
systems to 35 per cent. The revenue sacrifice is of the order of Rs.0.82 crore.
 94. To enable the paper industry to obtain its raw materials at reasonable
prices and to relieve the pressure on our forest resources, I propose to totally exempt
from customs duties wood chips for making pulp for the manufacture of paper or
paper board. On similar considerations, I propose to reduce the duty on wood pulp
imported for manufacture of paper from the existing levels to 30 per cent. These
measures involve revenue sacrifice of the order of Rs.1.10 crores.
 95. Certain changes in the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, relating to
warehousing, etc. and in the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 are also proposed. The details
of these proposals have been given in the Budget papers.
 18

 96. Sir, coming now to my proposals in respect of excise duties, my main
objectives are to minimise the effects of inflation, lessen scope for tax avoidance and
evasion, give a boost to selected industries suffering from demand recession, and
ensure better utilisation of the capacity and investment already created.
 97. I propose to continue upto 31st March, 1985 the levy of special excise
duties at the existing rates and with the existing exemptions.
 98. My first proposal for relief is in respect of khandsari sugar. I propose to
fully exempt khandsari sugar from the levy of excise duty. I am taking this measure
in view of the labour-intensive character of this industry, and to provide further
opportunity for growth of employment in this Industry. The abolition of excise duty
will also help this industry to pay better price to cane growers, and will give relief to
a large number of khandsari units located in far-flung rural areas. The revenue sacrifice
involved in this proposal is Rs.16.42 crores. Khandsari, I am told, is also better for
health. If as a result of this measure, the health of the nation improves, I hope the
credit will flow to me and not to my distinguished colleague, the Health Minister!
 99. Hon’ble Members would recall that excise duty was levied on electricity
as a revenue measure in the 1978 Budget. The net proceeds from the duty collected
on electricity are wholly distributed to the States. It is proposed to abolish the excise
duty on electricity leaving it to the State Governments to tap this source, to whatever
extent and in whatever manner they like. This will give to the States one more area
for resource mobilisation. To give the States some time to take appropriate action,
this abolition will be effective from 1st October, 1984.
 100. I also propose to provide substantial relief to the textile industry with a
view to making cloth cheaper. Hon’ble Members may recall that in the 1982 and
1983 Budgets, excise duty was reduced to encourage the production of blends with
the desirable proportions of polyester. Such fabrics are becoming increasingly popular
with the people. As a further measure of relief in this area and with the overall
objective of making such fabrics available at lower prices, I propose to reduce the
total excise duty on polyester-cotton blended yarn containing more than 40 per cent
but less than 70 per cent polyester to Rs.5 per kg. The existing rates of duty on such
yarn vary generally from Rs.7.5 per kg. to Rs.22.5 per kg. depending on the extent of
polyester-cotton mix. Under my proposal all blends over 40 per cent but below 70 per
cent of polyester will pay the same reduced rate of duty., For similar blends of polyester
and viscose, the excise duty will get reduced to Rs.10 per kg. from the present rates
which generally vary from Rs.11.25 per kg. to Ra.22.50 per kg. The revenue sacrifice
on these accounts is estimated at Rs.33.25 crores in a full year.
 101. Blended fabrics have also received my attention. The excise duty on
polyester-cotton blended fabrics containing more than 40 per cent but less than 70 per
cent polyester will be reduced to 2 per cent ad valorem. The Incidence of duty on
such fabrics at present varies from 7.5 per cent to 17.8 per cent ad valorem. This
 19

concession would cost the exchequer Rs.26.50 crores in a fun year. I also propose
that this duty at 2 per cent ad valorem be collected as additional excise duty in lieu of
sales tax. As Hon’ble Members are no doubt aware, proceeds of additional excise
duties on textiles go to the States
 102. These changes in the duty structure on polyester-cotton blended yarn and
polyester-cotton blended fabrics will, for a 87:33 blend, reduce the duty incidence by
about Rs.3.30 per square metre on a fabric carrying a wholesale price of about Rs.25
per square metre, and a retail price of Rs.35 to 40 per square metre. This duty reduction
will enable the industry to sell such fabrics at reduced prices.
 103. I also propose to provide relief on cotton fabrics which still constitute a
major share of the total production of cloth in the country. I propose to reduce excise
duty on cotton fabrics of less than 51 counts and of assessable value not exceeding
Rs.5 per square metre. Such fabrics at present pay duty of excise at rates varying
from 2.38 per cent to 3.56 per cent ad valorem in the case of composite mills.
Concessional rates of duty are allowed for Independent processors processing
powerloom and handloom fabrics. I propose to fully exempt handloom and powerloom
fabrics of the above varieties processed by Independent processors. The rate of duty
for composite mill fabrics is also being reduced to 1 per cent ad valorem retaining
more or less the present differential between the independent processors and the -
composite mills. This duty would be in the nature of additional excise duty in lieu of
sales tax and will entirely go to the States. Such fabrics are mostly consumed by the
weaker sections of society. The benefits of the reduction should become available to
them in the form of lower prices. This proposal on cotton fabrics would entail a
revenue sacrifice of Rs.28.40 crores.
 104. I hope, my proposals would also help the textile Industry. The Industry
should benefit through Increased demand that lower prices would generate.
 105. Cotton yarn and cellulosic spun yarn in the form of cross reel hanks are
finding increasing use in the handloom sector. In the Handloom Year, I propose to
reduce the duty incidence on such yarn supplied to registered Handloom Co-operative
Societies or to organisations set up or approved for the development of handlooms, by
about 50 per cent. This would involve a loss of Rs.3 crores to the exchequer in a full
year.
 106. In order to recoup some of the revenue loss flowing from the above package
of measures in respect of the textile industry, I propose to increase the incidence of
additional excise duty in lieu of sales tax from 7.5 per cent to 10 per cent on man-
made fabrics of assessable value exceeding Rs.25 per square metre. This increase
will not apply to those blended fabrics in respect of which duty is being reduced. The
impact will be on costlier fabrics which are consumed mainly by the more affluent
sections of society. They should not mind this. On this account, the exchequer will
gain by Rs.27 crores in a full year and this, too, would accrue entirely to the States.
 20

 107. I also propose to reduce the duty on shoddy blankets and other similar
blankets made from shoddy yarn processed by composite mills by about 7 per cent.
Such shoddy blankets if processed by independent processors will be wholly exempt.
The revenue loss on this account would be Rs.1 crore in a full year.
 108. Another industry needing urgent attention is the paper industry. This
Industry has been passing through a difficult phase troubled by rising cost of raw
materials and other inputs. My proposals aim at encouraging the production of paper
and paper board and preserving scarce natural forest resources. I have already referred
to the proposed exemption from customs duty on import of wood chips and wood pulp
for paper making. As a further measure of relief, I propose to reduce the basic excise
duty on printing and writing paper and also kraft paper produced by large paper mills
by Rs.425 per metric tonne, and corresponding concessions are being given on the
duty leviable on such paper when unconventional raw materials are used in their
manufacture. Simultaneously, the range of permissible unconventional raw materials
is being expanded.
 109. No concession for use of unconventional raw material is presently available
in the case of paper boards. I propose to-reduce the basic excise duty payable on
paper boards manufactured from at least 50 per cent unconventional raw materials
from the present general level of 10 per cent ad valorem + Rs.1430 per metric tonne
to R * s.560, Rs.900 or Rs.1120 per metric tonne depending on whether the clearances
of paper and paper board from such paper mills in the preceding financial year did not
exceed 3,000 tonnes, 7,500 tonnes or 16,500 tonnes respectively. For larger paper
mills using unconventional raw materials, the rate of basic excise duty on paper boards
is being reduced to 7 per cent ad valorem + Rs.925 per metric tonne.
 110. My proposals relating to the paper Industry would entail a loss of Rs.33
crores in excise duties in a full year. Along with the customs duty exemptions on
Import of wood chips and wood pulp, this package is expected to provide substantial
fiscal support to the development of indigenous paper industry and improve the
availability of paper at reasonable prices.
 111. Hon’ble Members may recall that certain time bound concessions were
given in October, 1983, in respect of certain specified commodities. Having regard to
the industry’s response to that measure which was intended to stimulate production by
generating incremental demand, I propose to continue the concession for one year
with certain modifications.
 112. In the case of commercial vehicles and three-axled vehicles, the concession
will be continued but the extent of duty concession granted in October, 1983 is being
reduced by 21 percentage points. I propose to remove some models of light commercial
vehicles from the purview of the exemption in order to establish parity among all
models of such vehicles in the matter of the rate of excise duty. These proposals
would entail a revenue loss of Rs.45 crores in a full year.
 21

 113. I propose to continue the concessions in the case of refrigerators, deep
freezers and parts of refrigerating appliances, etc. storage batteries and domestic
electrical appliances. The total revenue sacrifice on these items would be to the tune
of Rs.19 crores.
 114. In the case of tyres for buses and trucks and tyres for use off-the-road, I
do not propose to continue the concession granted in October, 1983 as there is no
further case for this concession in view of the price increases announced by this
industry. However, as a measure (if rationalisation and in order to reduce scope for
tax evasion, I propose to switch over by and large to a system of specific rates of
duties from the ad valorem rates.
 115. Production of china and porcelain tableware over the last few years has
been showing signs of stagnation and the capacity utilisation has been declining.
With a view to providing relief to the industry, I propose to reduce the basic excise
duty from 30 per cent to 15 per cent on these items. This would entail a revenue loss
of Rs.1.5 crores.
 116. With summer not very far away, I would like to help the Hon’ble Members
in keeping their tempers cool. I propose to reduce basic excise duty on table fans
from 10 per cent to 5 per cent and on ceiling fans of a diameter not exceeding 107 cms
from 15 per cent to 7.5 per cent. I also propose to reduce the basic excise duty on
evaporative type of coolers, including desert coolers, from 40 per cent to 30 per cent
ad valorem. These proposals would involve a revenue sacrifice of Rs.5.10 crores.
 117. As a rationalisation measure, I propose to reduce the basic duty on winding
wires from 10 per cent to 5 per cent and increase the basic duty on copper wire rods
by Rs.1300 per metric tonne. On an overall basis, these changes will neither result in
a loss nor gain in revenue.
 118. As Hon’ble Members will remember, many reputed artists had published
an appeal inviting our attention to piracy. As I “just can’t write these names off” I
propose to exempt sound-recorded cassettes wholly from excise duty. In view of the
upward revision of customs duty on magnetic tapes, the revenue loss on this account
is expected, by and large, to be made up.
 119. As a general measure of relief I propose to fully exempt laundry soap
manufactured by KVIC units and to reduce basic excise duty from 10 per cent to 5 per
cent on certain mass consumption items such as Imitation jewellery, stainless steel
utensils, glass chimneys for lanterns, high efficient wood burning stoves, umbrellas
and saccharine. The revenue sacrifice involved in these concessions is Rs.1.13 crores.
 120. Hon’ble Members may recall that an excise duty relief scheme to encourage
higher production is in operation for the past two years. I propose to continue the
scheme for one more year.
 22

 121. Hon’ble Members would also recall that in the last Budget, I had
rationalised the tariff relating to iron and steel items. This year, I have undertaken a
similar exercise in respect of non-ferrous metals. The tariff entries are being revised
on a more scientific basis. These changes as in last year would be brought into effect
from a subsequent date. Tin then, the present effective rates of duty would continue.
 122. I propose to increase the additional excise duty in respect of cigarettes,
The present ratio between basic excise duty and additional excise duty is being altered
to 1.75:1. This measure will result in the transfer of Rs.42.89 crores from the basic
excise duty account to the additional excise duty account in the next financial year,
and thus increase the accrual to the States. There will be a corresponding reduction
in the amount allocated to basic excise duty. The total incidence of excise duties on
cigarettes will remain unaltered.
 123. There are some other minor proposals which do not have much revenue
significance. These include readjustment of duties in some cases and deletion of
some tariff items which have remained fully exempted for a long time.
 124. In the light of the experience gained in the working of the Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal and the Customs. Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal,
some amendments are proposed to be carried out in the laws relating to them. These
are mainly of an administrative nature. I do not propose to take the time of the House
over these proposals.
 125. Mr. Speaker, Sir, with the phenomenal increase in central excise revenue
from about Rs.100 crores in 1953-54 to about Rs.10,100 crores in 1983-84, the Central
Excise Tariff has also substantially grown. I think, it is time to make a comprehensive
review of the tariff as it has developed over the last three decades with a view to
rationalising it. This would require a detailed study which can best be done only by
a technical study group. I propose, therefore, to appoint such a Group.
 126. The proposals that I have presented will yield additional revenue of
Rs.465.41 crores in customs duties and Rs.33.10 crores in excise duties. There would
be a transfer of Rs.43.64 crores from the basic duty account to the additional duty (in
lieu of sales tax) account. The concessions and reliefs aggregate Rs.7.26 crores on the
customs side and Rs.222.43 crores on the excise side. The net yield from customs
duties is Rs.458.15 crores. The net loss from excise duties comes to Rs.189.33 crores
out of which Centre’s share would be Rs.148.95 crores and States’ share would be
Rs.40.38 crores. This takes into account the States, share from additional excise
duties in lieu of sales tax to the extent of Rs.52.31 crores. The accrual to the central
exchequer for the additional tax effort in a full year would be Rs.309.20 crores.
 127. Copies of notifications giving effect to the changes in customs and excise
duties effective from the 1st March, 1984 will be laid on the Table of the House in due
course.
 23

 128. I had earlier stated that the budgetary deficit at the existing rates of taxation
would be Rs.2035 crores. The tax measures proposed now, taken together with reliefs
and concessions, are estimated to yield net additional revenue of Rs.272.88 crores to
the Centre. This leaves an uncovered deficit of Rs.1762 crores. It has been my
endeavour to keep the budgetary deficit to a relatively low figure and I am sure the
Hon’ble Members would agree that this order of deficit is appropriate to our
circumstances. I hope that the low deficit, combined with my proposals for boosting
production and lowering prices, will have a salutary effect on the inflationary
psychology in the economy.
 If I may, at this point, quote from Kautilya’s Arthashastra:–
 A´ÉÆ BÉÖEªÉÉÇiºÉàÉÖnªÉÆ ´ÉßÉËr SÉÉªÉºªÉ n¶ÉÇªÉäiÉ*
 cÉºÉÆ BªÉªÉºªÉ SÉ |ÉÉYÉ& ºÉÉvªÉäSSÉ ÉÊ´É{ÉªÉÇªÉàÉÂ**
 129. Four years ago, my distinguished predecessor, while presenting the first
Budget of the present Government, had expressed our firm resolve to repair the damage
and restore the country’s economy to the path of stability, growth and social justice.
Mr. Speaker, we have kept that promise.
 130. I commend this Budget to the House.
 [February 29, 1984]




 24

