 PART B
 5 4 . I now turn to the tax proposals for 1994-95. This year I shall begin with
the proposals relating to indirect taxes.
 5 5 . Over the years, our indirect tax structure has grown into a complex maze
of high and multiple rates, with numerous exemptions, and different rates being
applicable for the same product for different uses and users. This has resulted in
unnecessary complexity leading to administrative abuse, mounting litigation and
uncertain economic impact. All this has effectively eroded the tax base and buoyancy
of the system and created serious economic distortions. My proposals, in both
customs and central excise, aim at simplifying the structure and continuing the
process of moving to moderate rates of taxation.
 5 6 . Customs duties though lowered in the past three budgets need to be
brought down further to make key imported raw materials and capital goods available
to Indian industry at reasonable costs and also to reduce unduly high levels of
protection to industry. At the same time, the scale of duty reduction has to be
calibrated to ensure that it does not place unreasonable pressure on domestic
producers of similar products. In this framework, the key features of my customs
tariff reform proposals are:-
 · Further reduction in the peak rate of customs duty;
 · Substantial reduction in duties on key raw materials, such as steel and
 chemicals;
 · Reduction in customs duties on capital goods to boost investment combined
 with other incentives which will help the domestic capital goods industry;
 · Reduction or removal of anomalies caused by import duties on raw
 materials and components being higher than on finished products;
 · A systematic effort to unify rates on similar products to serve both economic
 rationality and to reduce the scope for classification disputes;

 13
 · A major pruning of notifications including end use exemptions to about
 half their present number, thus reducing discretionary power and
 possibilities for disputes;
 5 7 . I propose to reduce the peak rate of customs duty from 85% to 65%.
Items like baggage and liquor will however continue to attract higher duty as at
present.
 5 8 . Availability of capital goods at a reasonable cost is necessary to enhance
our competitiveness and promote investment. It is also necessary to ensure that
our domestic capital goods industry, which has tremendous potential, is not at a
comparative disadvantage due to anomalies in the tax structure . To further both
these objectives , I propose the following package of measures:
 (a) I propose to reduce basic customs duty on project imports and general
 capital goods from 35% to 25%. The facility of project imports is being
 extended to include port development. All this will help to reduce cost of
 investment and modernisation in Indian industry. Import duty on parts,
 whether imported as parts of original equipment, or as spares is also
 being reduced to 25% from the present rates varying from 25% to 85%.
 Import duty on fertiliser projects and power projects will continue at nil
 rate and 20% respectively without any countervailing duty.
 (b) Domestic suppliers of capital goods have consistently argued that if
 domestic capital goods are to compete with imports, there should be a
 countervailing duty on imports of capital goods equivalent to the excise
 duty on domestic capital goods. I propose to accept this demand.
 (c) I am simultaneously extending the benefit of Modvat to capital goods so
 that full credit of excise duty paid on domestic capital goods or
 countervailing duty paid on imported capital goods will be available at one
 time. This has been a long standing demand of all sectors of Indian
 industry.
 (d) At present, machine tools attract duty at varying rates of 40%, 60% and
 80%. I propose to simplify the structure by charging duty at 35% or 45%
 only.
 (e) With the reduction of duty on finished capital goods it is necessary to
 reduce the customs duty on steel, which is a key input. I propose to
 reduce the customs duty on steel from a range of 75% to 85% at present
 to 50%. Import duties on primary forms of major non-ferrous metals copper,
 zinc and lead are also being unified at 50%. These proposals will give a
 strong boost to investment in the economy and will help the domestic
 capital goods industry, in particular.
 5 9 . To help domestic metal producers, the import duties on all ores and
concentrates are being reduced and unified at 10%. To reduce the cost of inputs for
the secondary steel sector, I propose to reduce the import duty on melting scrap
from 12.5% to 10% and on iron ore pellets from 15% to 10%.
 6 0 . In order to give a thrust to the export efforts of our leather industry,

 14
which is a major export earner, and is also employment intensive, I propose to
reduce import duty on a large number of items of machinery and raw materials
used in this industry from rates varying from 25% to 50% at present to a uniform
level of 20% without the addition of countervailing duty.
 6 1 . Electronics and telecommunication are vital for rapid economic development
and can greatly contribute to generation of both additional employment and exports.
I propose to rationalise the tariff structure for these sectors as follows :
 (a) The import duty on computer parts is being reduced from 80% to 50%.
 The duty on specified components is being reduced from 50% to 40% and
 on specified piece parts from 35% to 30%.. The import duty on application
 software is being reduced from 85% to 20% .
 (b) In order to encourage the telecommunication sector, I propose to reduce
 import duty on non-electronic parts for manufacture of such equipment
 from 50% to 40% and on optical fibre from 85% to 40% to encourage
 manufacture of optical fibre cables in the country.
6 2 . The domestic watch industry has a significant growth potential . To enable
this industry to become internationally competitive, I propose to reduce the import
duty on certain items of machinery for the industry from 50% at present to 25%.
I also propose to reduce the duty on certain components and raw materials for the
watch industry from 70% and 50% at present to 25% and 20% respectively.
 6 3 . The present import duty structure for medical equipment is complex and
involves in some cases time consuming administrative procedure. The domestic
industry is also not able to compete with imported equipment because it is now
available duty-free to hospitals on production of certificates by designated authorities.
In order to remove the above hindrances , I propose to abolish the system of
certification for charitable hospitals and freely permit import of specified medical
equipment at 15% without any countervailing duty. The list of such equipment is
being separately notified and can be expanded on merits. Import at zero rate for
government hospitals and for all specified life saving and sight saving equipment
is, however, being continued. Import duty on other medical equipment which is at
present 85% is being reduced to 40%. Components for their manufacture will be
allowed to be imported at 15% customs duty. This differential will help manufacture
of medical equipment by indigenous industry.
 6 4 . The import duty structure for coal and petroleum is being simplified.
Crude petroleum and coal will attract import duty of 35% as against Rs.1500 per
metric tonne and 85% respectively. Duty on coke is being reduced from 85% to
25%. LPG and other petroleum gases will attract import duty at 15%. Naphtha and
kerosene will continue to be exempted from basic customs duty. Other petroleum
products will attract an import duty of 30%. These changes do not affect the
administered prices of petroleum products to consumers.
 6 5 . The present import duty structure for chemicals provides for a lower rate
of duty of 15% for the basic feed stocks and peak rate of 85% for the finished
chemicals. The overall dispersal of the rates is being reduced by the reduction of
peak rate to 65%. In addition, duties on DMT, PTA and MEG are being reduced
from 70% to 60% and on intermediates like xylenes and toluene, the duty is being

 15
reduced from 40% to 30%. The 15% rate for basic feed stocks has been kept
undisturbed.
 6 6 . In the pharmaceutical sector, import duty on a large number of raw
materials which at present varies from 85% to 50% is being lowered to two rates of
50% or 25%. In a few cases, there has been some upward adjustment of import
duty having regard to the need to protect the interest of domestic manufacturers of
drug intermediates.
 6 7 . While I have no doubt that the phased reduction of customs tariffs is
essential for the longer term interest of our industry, I am also fully aware of the
concern of some industries about the dumping of certain imported goods at artificially
low prices. I assure the House that our anti dumping provisions will be reviewed
and further strengthened, if necessary.
 6 8 . I now turn to my proposals for central excise.
 6 9 . This Budget proposes a major reform of the excise tax structure as part
of our programme of modernising our tax system. The principal features of this
restructuring are:
 · Extension of Modvat to capital goods and petroleum products;
 · Shift in the bulk of excise taxation from specific to ad valorem rates which
 will assure much greater built -in buoyancy of revenues.
 · Reduction in the total number of ad valorem tax rates to about half the
 existing number which will be a major step towards simplicity and
 transparency;
 · Continuing the process of lowering rates when they are unduly high;
 · Application of uniform rates for similar commodities to the extent possible.
 This will reduce classification problems, scope for misuse and widespread
 litigation;
 · Removal of complicated price list procedure;
 · Reduction of the number of special exemption notifications by about half.
 7 0 . These steps will promote growth of manufacturing output and employment,
will make tax administration easier, less discretionary and also reduce the scope
for misclassification, disputes and evasion. They will increase revenue elasticity
and pave the way for an eventual adoption of a Value Added Tax.
 7 1 . Inevitably, a major restructuring involves changes in many rates for several
products as products have to be reclassified into fewer rate categories. Furthermore,
duty rates have been adjusted in some cases to compensate for loss of revenue
because of the extension of Modvat. However, I have ensured that items of mass
consumption are not burdened by higher taxes. For example, full exemption continues
for many goods such as handloom products, unbranded drugs, domestic electric
bulbs, bicycles, baby food, cooking oil, spices, jams, jellies, sauces, tea and coffee.
And care has been taken not to raise the rates on, for example, sugar, matches and
vanaspati. There should be no adverse effect on prices of essential items of
consumption of the common man.

 16
 7 2 . I will now highlight a few major areas of special interest.
 7 3 . Sir, the House may recall that the Modvat scheme was introduced in
1986. Its subsequent extension has greatly helped to reduce the cascading effect of
input taxes. But the coverage remains incomplete. Petroleum products, textiles,
matches, tobacco products and capital goods had been left out of the scheme.
There is a persistent demand from industry to make the scheme more comprehensive.
I now propose to extend the Modvat scheme to two important sectors namely,
capital goods and petroleum products.
 7 4 . I propose to rationalise the structure for petroleum products. At present,
the excise duty rates are specific. There are numerous exemptions depending on
the end use. I propose to replace the existing specific rates by a uniform advalorem
rate of 10% on all petroleum products with the exception of motor spirit which will
attract duty of 20%. End use exemptions will be virtually eliminated. Existing
concessions for the fertilizer industry are, however, being continued. These changes
have no impact on the administered prices of these items.
 7 5 . The current duty structure for cotton and man made fabrics is a
combination of ad-valorem and specific rates. I propose to switch over to ad-valorem
rates of 5%, 10% and 20% only instead of the numerous specific and ad-valorem
rates currently prevailing.
 7 6 . The present excise duty structure on fibres and yarns is complicated and
different specific rates are prescribed for different varieties of yarn and fibres. This
has required frequent testing of samples to determine the correct duty liability. In
order to obviate all problems of classification and to make the excise duty neutral
as between various fibres and yarns, I propose to impose a uniform excise duty of
20% on all fibres and blended or spun yarns. On cotton yarn, excise duty is,
however, proposed at 5% only instead of the present complex and varying specific
rates depending on the count of the yarn. As regards filament yarns, revenue
considerations preclude moving to a uniform excise duty. I have thus proposed an
ad-valorem duty rate of 60% for polyester filament yarn, 30% for nylon and
polypropylene yarn and 15% for viscose filament yarn. For industrial yarns, lower
rates of 30%, 20% and 10% have been prescribed. The scheme of Modvat is being
extended to yarns made from fibres. With this Modvat will cover all yarns. These
changes are largely a simplification and rationalisation of the structure. Combined
with the reduction in customs duties, they should help to moderate prices in this
s e c t o r.
 7 7 . I propose to fix a uniform duty of 15% on all metals, except aluminium for
which the duty will be 20% as against 25% now. However, a lower duty of 10% will
be available to pig iron and certain other products of iron.
 7 8 . The excise duty structure on drugs differentiates between Schedule I,
Schedule II and other drugs. Schedule I drugs which are for the National Health
Programme and are under price control are fully exempted from excise duty. This
will continue. Single formulations of Schedule II drugs attract excise duty at 10%
while other branded drugs pay excise duty at 15%. I propose to unify these rates
at 15%. I propose to charge a moderate 10% excise duty on branded ayurvedic and
homoeopathic medicines and medicines of other alternative systems. At present,
bulk drugs producers cannot get full benefit of Modvat credit because the excise
duty on bulk drugs is 5% which is too low. This is being raised to 10% to enable

 17
them to get full credit. Unbranded drugs, however, will continue to be exempted
from excise duty.
 7 9 . In order to simplify the duty structure for various chemicals and chemical
based products like dyes, paints, tanning preparations, etc., I am proposing a
uniform duty of 20% on such products instead of present rates varying from 5% to
25%. A uniform duty of 30% is being proposed for major bulk plastics , synthetic
paints and detergents, which currently attract 35%.
 8 0 . The paper duty structure is complicated due to ad-valorem rates of nil,
10%,15%,25%,30%, specific rates and specific cum ad-valorem rates. This is now
being simplified by making the general rate of duty on paper at 20%, keeping nil
rate for news print, stationery articles etc., 30% for paper based laminates and
floor coverings and 10% or 15% for paper made from unconventional raw materials.
I am enlarging the scope of the exemption currently available to paper mills using
unconventional raw materials. This exemption limits the benefit by clubbing the
clearances of paper from more than one factory of a manufacturer. I am now
allowing this concession to be availed of by each factory separately.
 8 1 . The duty rate of 70% applicable to cosmetics and similar personal care
products are too high for items which are now increasingly forming part of the
consumption basket of ordinary people. The rate is, therefore, being reduced to
50%.
 8 2 . I am also proposing certain changes in the general small scale industry
exemption scheme. At present only registered units are eligible for concessions
upto a clearance value of Rs. 75 lakhs. Non-registered units can get exemption
only up to Rs. 30 lakhs. I propose to do away with this distinction so that small
scale units can get the exemption meant for them irrespective of whether they are
registered or not. This will satisfy one of the major demands of small scale industry.
The scope of the small scale exemption scheme is also being expanded to cover a
number of additional items including certain iron, steel and copper products.
 8 3 . Under the present scheme, a small unit manufacturing goods under the
brand name of another unit is entitled to duty concession only if the brand name
does not belong to a large unit. There have been reports of bigger units avoiding
payment of duty by getting their brand names registered in the name of smaller
units. This does not allow a small manufacturer to promote his own brand. With
the advent of international brand names in the country, it is necessary to check
the misuse of the scheme in the interest of domestic industry. I, therefore, propose
that the benefit of duty concession would not be available to clearances of goods
bearing the brand name of another manufacturer.
 8 4 . One of the persistent demands of the small scale industries has been to
allow them to pay duty even though they are otherwise entitled to exemption as
this will enable their customers to claim the benefit of Modvat credit. There is
considerable merit in this request, and I propose to give the option to those who
will like to exercise it.
 8 5 . It may be recalled that in the last budget, in order to give encouragement
to the ship breaking industry, basic customs duty on ships for breaking up was
reduced to 5%. Countervailing duty was payable in addition. Ferrous metals obtained
from breaking up of ships were consequently exempted from excise duty. There

 18
have been some disputes regarding liability of countervailing duty on ships for
breaking up. In order to obviate the disputes, I propose to exempt ships for breaking
up from countervailing duty and correspondingly adjust the basic customs duty to
15%. For the ship breaking industry, all goods obtained from such breaking up are
also proposed to be exempted from excise duty so that ship breaking activity is
completely outside the excise control.
 8 6 . As I am continuing the specific rates of duties on cigarettes, and these
have remained unchanged for two years despite an increase in price, I propose to
increase the duties on cigarettes by about 12%. However, in the non-filter segment,
the excise duty for upto 60 mm category is being reduced from Rs. 120 per thousand
to Rs. 60 per thousand, for increased utilisation of tobacco in this industry, which
would in turn help the tobacco growers.
 8 7 . Over the years, while attempts have been made to widen the base for
domestic indirect taxes, the services sector has not been subjected to taxation. Yet
this sector accounts for about 40% of our GDP and is showing strong growth.
There is no sound reason for exempting services from taxation , when goods are
taxed and many countries treat goods and services alike for tax purposes. The Tax
Reforms Committee has also recommended imposition of tax on services as a
measure for broadening the base of indirect taxes. I, therefore, propose to make a
modest effort in this direction by imposing a tax on services of telephones, non-life
insurance and stock brokers. The tax will be charged at 5% on the amount of
telephone bills , the net premium charged by the insurance companies, and the
brokerage or commission charged by the stock brokers in relation to their services.
These proposals will come into force from a date to be notified later on.
 8 8 . The existing system of determination of value of goods for charging excise
duty is cumbersome and time-consuming. It involves filing of price lists in advance
by the assessee and their approval by the excise officer. The process has to be
followed whenever there is a change in the price. As a measure of procedural
simplification, I have decided to dispense with the requirement of price lists. The
assessee will now be allowed to pay excise duty on the basis of the value arrived at
from the invoice. I am sure that this facility will be widely welcome by the industry.
This will also help lay the ground for eventual adoption of a value added tax which
relies on invoice value.
 8 9 . The details of the revenue implications of the measures announced are
given in the Explanatory Memorandum to the Finance Bill.
 9 0 . I have also proposed certain other amendments in the Finance Bill seeking
to effect changes in the Customs Act, and Excise and Customs Tariffs. The
amendments are merely enabling provisions and do not have significant revenue
implications. Besides, there are proposals for amendment of some of the existing
notifications. In order to save the time of the House, I do not propose to recount
them.
 9 1 . Copies of notifications giving effect to the above changes in customs and
excise duties will be laid on the Table of the House in due course.
 9 2 . I now turn to my direct tax proposals for 1994-95.
 9 3 . I propose to carry forward the basic philosophy which has guided our tax
reforms of moving to a simpler system with moderate rates of tax and a much
greater reliance on broadening the base, with better tax administration.

 19
 9 4 . I have received numerous representations from workers, trade unions,
and other bodies representing middle class citizens for raising the exemption limit
for income tax which is now Rs.30,000. I am persuaded that there is merit in the
demand and I propose to raise the exemption limit to Rs. 35,000. With this, a
salary or wage earner with a gross income of Rs. 50,000 will pay no income-tax. A
working woman with a salary of Rs. 52,000 will also pay no tax.
 9 5 . I also propose to adjust the tax slabs which have not been changed for
two years. At present, the first bracket is from Rs. 30,000 to Rs. 50,000 with a tax
rate of 20 per cent. Henceforth the first slab will be Rs. 35,000 to Rs. 60,000, with
the same rate of 20 per cent. tax . The second slab at present is from Rs. 50,000
to Rs. 1,00,000 with a tax rate of 30 per cent. Hereafter, the second slab will be Rs.
60,000 to Rs. 1,20,000 with the same rate of 30 per cent. tax. The maximum tax
rate of 40 per cent. which at present applies to incomes above Rs.1,00,000 will
henceforth be applicable to incomes above Rs. 1,20,000.
 9 6 . I had stated last year that I was forced to retain the surcharge of 12 per
cent on non-corporate incomes for one more year. I am happy to announce that I
now propose to withdraw the surcharge completely.
 9 7 . Last year, I had indicated that while major reforms of the corporate tax
structure are desirable they would have to be deferred by one year. I now propose
to implement these reforms which will help both our private and public sector
companies to save more, invest more, and become more competitive.
 9 8 . At present, widely held companies are taxed at 45 per cent. while other
domestic companies attract 50 per cent tax. I propose to do away with the distinction
which now exists between the tax rates for widely held and closely held domestic
companies and lower both rates to a single rate of 40 per cent.
 9 9 . All domestic companies having income exceeding Rs.75,000 are liable to
pay surcharge at the rate of 15 per cent. Much as I would like to eliminate this
surcharge, revenue constraints compel me to continue this levy for the present.
The tax on companies incorporated abroad, but earning income in India, is 65 per
cent at present. In line with the general reduction in corporate tax rates, this rate
is being reduced to 55 per cent.
 1 0 0 .One of the consequences of our economic policies is the need to assist
Indian companies to re-structure themselves to improve their competitive position
in the market. This may call for divestment of part of the business assets or
realisation of potential value from dormant assets, both of which will entail long-
term capital gains tax. This acts as a deterrent to re-structuring. The present rate
of such long-term capital gains tax on domestic companies is 40 per cent, whereas
long-term capital gains of individuals are taxed at only 20 per cent. I, therefore,
propose to lower the rate of capital gains tax on domestic companies to 30 per cent.
 1 0 1 .I also propose that, just like shares, even units of Unit Trust of India and
other approved Mutual Funds, if held for more than 12 months, will be treated as
long-term capital assets, with consequential benefits; the required holding period
for such units at present is 36 months. This will bring some welcome relief to
investors in units who generally belong to lower middle or middle classes.
 1 0 2 .The rates of taxation of investment income (i.e. dividend and interest

 20
income) of non-residents vary with the tax status of the recipient. I propose to
rationalise the scheme of such taxation by having a uniform rate of 20 per cent. on
such income in the hands of all non-resident companies and non-resident individuals
(be they Indians or foreign nationals).
 1 0 3 .Representations have been received from Non-Resident Indians that they
should not lose their Non-Resident status even if they visit India and stay for more
than 149 days. I propose to raise this period of stay to 181 days.
 1 0 4 .Two years ago I introduced a special tax rebate for senior citizens (i.e.,
those aged 65 and above) at 10 per cent of the tax due if their income was below
Rs. 50,000. Last year I increased the tax rebate to 20 per cent and also increased
the income limit to Rs. 75,000. I now propose to raise the tax rebate admissible to
them from 20 per cent of the tax due to 40 per cent and make the benefit available
to senior citizens having income upto Rs. 1 lakh.
 1 0 5 .In 1992, we had decided to club the income arising to a minor child with
that of the parent. This causes undue hardship in cases involving handicapped
children and their parents. In order that the post-tax income of a child who is
physically handicapped is not reduced, I propose to exempt the incomes of such
handicapped children from the provisions of clubbing, both under the Income-tax
and Wealth-tax Acts.
 1 0 6 .For enabling self-employed people to contribute to a pension fund to provide
for security in their old age, the Unit Trust of India is going to set up a fund. I
propose to include contributions to such a pension fund among the amounts which
qualify for tax rebate under Section 88 of the Income-tax Act.
 1 0 7 .Investment in the development of human resources is an essential pre-
requisite for growth and progress. Several students take loans for their studies. As
a means of helping students from poorer families, who take loans from financial
institutions, I propose to allow a deduction from income of Rs.25,000 per year on
account of repayments of principal and payment of interest up to a cumulative
total of Rs. 2 lakhs. This tax concession will be available to students who undertake
graduate or post-graduate studies in Engineering, Medicine or Management, or
post-graduate studies in pure sciences, applied sciences, Mathematics or Statistics.
 1 0 8 .Encouragement of science and technology is essential for promotion of
growth. At present, when an assessee makes a contribution to a National Laboratory
under the aegis of Indian Council of Agricultural Research, Indian Council of Medical
Research or Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, he or she gets a weighted
deduction of 125 per cent of the contribution. I propose to extend this benefit to all
Universities, deemed Universities, Indian Institutes of Technology and scientific
laboratories under the aegis of the Defence Research and Development Organization,
the Department of Electronics, the Department of Bio-technology and the Department
of Atomic Energy.
 1 0 9 .Several Universities and Co-operative Societies have made representations
that the tax exemption under section 10(10C) for approved Voluntary Retirement
Schemes should be extended to their employees. I propose to accept their
representations.
 1 1 0 .A statement has already been made in the last session of Parliament,

 21
signifying Government’s intention to exempt the incomes of Government Corporations
established for the welfare of the backward classes. I propose to make legislative
amendments for carrying out this commitment.
 1 1 1 .The system of community of property (COMMUNIAO DOS BENS) is peculiar
to the people living in Goa, Daman, Diu, Dadra and Nagar Haveli. Recently, certain
judicial decisions have been handed down according to which business income of
a Goanese family becomes taxable entirely in the hands of a single entity. The
decisions affect the time-honoured method of dividing such income equally and
assessing such income separately in the hands of the husband and wife. This I
understand has given rise to unnecessary tensions and anxiety amongst the Goan
couples. To set at rest all controversies in this area, I propose to make suitable
amendments in the Income-tax Act to ensure that, excepting for salaries, any other
income arising to the citizens governed by the system of community of property in
Goa will be divided equally and assessed separately in the hands of the husband
and the wife.
 1 1 2 .We have, in the last few years, liberalised the taxation of perquisites in the
form of medical expenditure in the case of employees. I propose extending the
scope of the benefit by including reimbursement of bills paid by employees to
recognised private hospitals.
 1 1 3 .In order to give relief to those living in their own houses and as an incentive
for house construction, I propose to raise the deduction on account of interest on
borrowed capital for house construction from Rs.5,000 to Rs.10,000 for purposes
of income tax.
 1 1 4 .We have been implementing a simple presumptive scheme of taxation for
the assessees in the unorganised sector for the past two years. The scheme was to
have ended with this year. I propose to continue with the scheme. My hope is that
more people will avail of this very simple scheme and come forward readily to
contribute their mite to the national tax effort without any fear or inhibition.
 1 1 5 .In addition, I am introducing a new estimated income scheme for
contractors with a turnover of upto Rs.40 lakhs and for truck-owners who own
upto ten trucks. In the case of contractors, the net profit will be estimated at 8 per
cent. of the gross receipts. In the case of truck owners, the income will be estimated
at Rs. 24,000 per truck per year for Light Commercial Vehicles and Medium Motor
Vehicles, and Rs. 30,000 per truck per year for Heavy Transport Motor Vehicles. In
both these cases, no further deduction on account of depreciation or interest or
other expenses will be allowed. In both cases, the scheme is optional. This scheme
is based on the recommendation of the Chelliah Committee on Tax Reforms. The
scheme will be simple and free of irritants, and I expect an enthusiastic response.
 1 1 6 .Last year, I announced a five-year tax holiday to new industrial
undertakings commencing production in States specified in the Eighth Schedule to
the Income-tax Act. There have been repeated and widespread demands that the
benefit should be extended to backward districts in other States. I had announced
the setting up of a Study Group to go into this question. The Group’s report has
been received and is under consideration. As a stimulus to new investment in
backward districts in other States of the country, I propose to extend this concession
to such districts which are backward according to certain guidelines which will be
prescribed.

 22
 1 1 7 .Government has already announced its intention of allowing the deduction
in respect of profits of new industrial undertakings engaged in the manufacture of
items listed in the Eleventh Schedule of the Income-tax Act to large-scale units
also, provided such units are set up in the backward States enumerated in the
Eighth Schedule. I propose to give legislative shape to this intention.
 1 1 8 .In order to continue to give encouragement to the export of computer
software, I propose extending the exemption for such export profits for one more
y e a r.
 1 1 9 .We have an ambitious programme of attracting tourists to this country. It
has been strongly urged that the present rate of tax on expenditure incurred in
hotels discourages tourism. I, therefore, propose to reduce the rate of expenditure
tax from 20 per cent. to 10 per cent.. I am doing so on the expectation that the
State Governments too will follow suit and reduce their taxation on hotels in order
to encourage tourism within the country and attract more foreign tourists to our
land.
 1 2 0 .Pollution control is of vital importance to all of us. I, therefore, propose to
include pollution control among the eligible projects for concession under section
35AC of the Income-tax Act, so that a person who makes a contribution to such a
project can claim 100 per cent of such contribution as a tax deduction.
 1 2 1 .The exemption limit for gift-tax is Rs.30,000 and an additional exemption
of Rs.30,000 is available for gifts to dependant relatives on the occasion of marriage.
Marriages are joyous occasions of family re-union, and honest tax-paying citizens
have a right to be free from tax considerations as far as possible on such auspicious
occasions. I, therefore, propose to raise the exemption for such gifts on the occasion
of marriage of a dependant relative from Rs.30,000 to Rs.1,00,000.
 1 2 2 .As conventionally estimated, the proposed changes in custom duties will
result in a revenue loss of Rs. 2,981 crores and a revenue gain of Rs. 699 crores.
On the Excise side, the revenue gain is anticipated at Rs. 2,106 crores and reliefs
will amount to Rs. 2,000 crores. The effect of changes in Direct taxes will result in
a loss of Rs. 1,075 crores in the personal Income-tax collections and Rs. 1,355
crores in Corporation tax. The estimated loss on Expenditure-tax is Rs. 75 crores.
Taking into account an estimated gain of Rs. 600 crores on account of taxes on
services, the total net loss on account of tax measures by conventional methods of
calculation amounts to Rs. 4,081 crores. The loss to the States on account of
reliefs in personal Income-tax is Rs. 625 crores and the gains on the Excise duty
Rs. 148 crores. On the basis of these calculations, the Centre will suffer a net loss
of Rs. 3604 crores.
 1 2 3 .Normally, a revenue loss of this magnitude at a time when the fiscal
system is under pressure would require levy of additional taxes or an increase in
existing rates. I have not followed this course of action for several reasons. The
revenue loss calculations do not give any credit for simplification and rationalisation
of the tax structure which will help revenue collections. Fiscal experts are near
unanimous that there is considerable evasion of taxes in our system and that it is
possible to reduce tax rates and yet mobilise additional revenue by improving tax
administration and compliance. The simplification in the indirect tax structure
that is now being introduced, will reduce the scope for discretion, disputes and

 23
litigation, all of which are a source of tax evasion. The shift to ad-valorem excise
duties will also add to buoyancy. I also propose to make a major effort at improving
tax administration. Tax laws are going to be administered fairly and firmly.
Computerisation, which has already begun in both Departments, is expected to
further improve tax administration. I also hope that tax payers who have long
argued for moderation in the rates of taxes and held out assurances that this
would improve compliance, will now live up to their side of the bargain. They have,
in the long run, the most to gain from the success of this experiment.
 1 2 4 .Economic life everywhere is characterised by great uncertainty. There is
always the possibility that things may not work out the way I have assumed.
Although one cannot be dogmatic in these matters, my considered view is that the
risks involved in the course of action I have proposed, do not cross the limits of
prudence. The consequence of postponing the tax reform, or of imposing additional
taxes to offset the revenue loss as conventionally calculated, would be wholly
unproductive in a situation where our economy is characterised by sizeable unutilized
industrial capacity, record food stocks and comfortable foreign exchange reserves.
Any such course could give a setback to the economic recovery which our country
needs, and which is now on the horizon.
 1 2 5 .For these reasons, I do not propose to assume any revenue loss as a
result of the Budget proposals. The Budget deficit will therefore remain at Rs.
6,000 crores and the fiscal deficit at Rs. 54,915 crores. At this level, the fiscal
deficit will be around 6 per cent. of GDP. This is higher than I would like to see, but
as I have said, all tax reforms involve some risks.
 1 2 6 .This Budget is being presented at a critical time for the economy. There
are moments in history which call for determined and decisive action. The
consequences of inaction or ill-designed responses can be horrendous and are felt
for decades to come. June, 1991 was such a moment. Thanks to the magnificent
leadership provided by the Prime Minister Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao, we have been
successful in reversing the adverse tide in our fortunes. However, the task of national
reconstruction is by no means over. It is by its very nature a task which should
occupy us for the rest of the decade. But we pursue this task today from a stronger
position. The economy has been restored to health and shows all the potential for
rapid growth in the years ahead. Our agricultural sector is strong and well placed
to respond to the new policies. Our industrial sector, both, private and public, has
begun the difficult process of restructuring to face increasingly competitive market
conditions. The climate for investment - both domestic and foreign - has vastly
improved. The tax structure now proposed goes a long way towards the kind of
modern tax system and moderate tax rates and an emphasis on compliance, which
is the hallmark of all successful countries. I am confident that it will provide a
strong stimulus for new investments, economic revival and international
competitiveness which is what the economy needs today. The medium term objectives
set out in the report of the Tax Reform Committee are now clearly within our reach.
 1 2 7 .Mr. Speaker, Sir, this Budget is inspired by a firm conviction that India
has all the material and human resources to be a front-ranking nation of the world.
We are on the threshold of a new century, indeed a new millennium. There are
tremendous opportunities, provided we have the wisdom and foresight to seize
them. There are also immense dangers if we falter or appear indecisive. Sir, this

 24
then is a time for hard work, for recapturing the high noon of idealism which
inspired our freedom struggle, for a firm determination to hold aloft, undimmed
and untarnished, the bright torch of India which, as Jawaharlal Nehru was fond of
saying, embodies her great and eternal spirit so that its light reaches every home
and rekindles hope, faith and courage, and pride in being an Indian. Let us strive
tirelessly, as the great poet Rabindranath Tagore said in his prayer, to build an
India where “the clear stream of reason has not lost its way into the dreary desert
sand of dead habit”. May we be worthy of this noble task and of this ancient and
sacred land of India.
 1 2 8 .Sir, I commend the Budget to this august House.
 [28th February, 1994]

