 PART B
 52. Honourable Members may recall that while presenting the budget proposals
for the current year, I placed before the House certain broad considerations which
Government took into account in deciding the extent to which the revenue deficit of
a year should be covered by additional taxation. I suggested that the long era of
revenue surpluses was perhaps coming to a close; for the first time the actuals for
1958-59 have disclosed a small revenue deficit of Rs.5 crores. I also suggested that
exceptional circumstances affecting the deficit of a year should be taken into account
in deciding upon the extent to which the deficit should be covered and that due regard
should be given to the amount of additional taxation raised in recent years. I also
ventured to underline the need for the continuous mobilisation of resources for financing
the increasing needs of planned development. The considerations I placed before the
House last year apply with equal force to the budget of the coming year and although
the large revenue deficit next year is due, in the main, to larger outlay on development
in the last year of the present Plan and the increased requirements of Defence in the
interests of national security, I am convinced that a part of the deficit should be

 13

covered by additional taxation. As in the current year, I propose that about a fourth of
the deficit in sight, may be covered by new taxation.
 53. In framing the taxation proposals for the coming year, I have had in mind
something more than the immediate needs of that year. I mentioned earlier the
continuous need to raise additional resources for development. In the context of planned
development, it is essential, in dealing with the budgetary needs of each year, to think
in terms of broadening and adjusting the bases of taxation so that the revenue raised
continues to expand with the years. The proposals for the coming year, particularly
those widening the base of taxation, have been formulated with the needs of the Third
Plan in view. While direct taxation will be kept under constant and continuous review
so as to make it yield the maximum resources, the bulk of the expansion in taxation
will have to come from indirect taxation.
INDIRECT TAXATION
 54. In the field of indirect taxation, my proposals cover both the adjustment
of rates of existing taxes and the levy of taxes on certain new commodities. The
proposals are explained in detail in the memorandum circulated with the budget papers
and I propose to mention them only briefly.
 55. My first proposal is to levy a duty of Rs.200 per metric tonne on tin plates
and tinned sheets. Suitable adjustments would be made where duty paid steel is used
in their manufacture. The yield in a full year is estimated at Rs.208 lakhs.
 56. My second proposal is to impose a small duty of Rs.10 per metric tonne
on pig iron. Pig iron used in the manufacture of steel will be exempted from the duty,
which is expected to yield Rs.60 lakhs a year.
 57. My third proposal is to levy a duty of Rs.500 per metric tonne on aluminium
steets and circles and Rs.300 per metric tonne on aluminium ingots. Necessary
adjustments will be made in the duty on circles, sheets, etc., when duty paid ingots are
used in their manufacture. The estimated yield is Rs.86 lakhs.
 58. My next proposal is to levy a duty of 10 per cent ad valorem on all types
of internal combustion engines used as prime movers for transport vehicles. A lower
rate of 5 per cent ad valorem will be charged on stationary types of these engines
which are generally used in industry and for agricultural purposes. The yield is estimated
at Rs.107 lakhs a year.
 59. I also propose to levy a small tax m certain essential cycle parts. A duty
of Rs.2 on each free wheel and Rs.4 on each rim will be levied. This will ensure the
realisation of Rs.10 of each completed cycle without bringing into the excise net a
large number of small assemblers of cycles and manufacturers of cycle parts. The
annual yield is estimated at Rs.100 lakhs.
 14

 60. Electric motors and parts thereof are not now subject to tax. It is proposed
to levy a duty ranging from 5 per cent to 15 per cent ad valorem on various types of
motors used for different purposes., The revenue from this is estimated at Rs.46 lakhs
a year.
 61. A duty on exposed cinematograph films is also being levied. It will vary
from 10 naye paise per metre to 50 naye paise per metre depending on the type of the
films. News reels and shorts would be subject to the lower rate of duty. The yield from
this is estimated at Rs.75 lakhs.
 62. My last proposal for new excises relates to silk fabrics m which a duty of
30 naye paise per square yard will be levied. The handloom sector will not be affected
by this measure which is expected to yield Rs.30 lakhs.
 63. I shall now turn to the readjustments in the existing rates of duty on
certain commodities.
 64. The House will remember that in 1956 an excise duty was levied on the
larger passenger motor cars while all commercial vehicles and small and medium
cars, motor cycles and scooters were not taxed. I now propose to levy a duty ranging
up to 15 per cent ad valorem on all types of motor vehicles. The total revenue is
estimated at Rs.625 lakhs.
 65. Refined diesel oil was made subject to duty in 1956 when a tax at 25 naye
paise per imperial gallon was levied. Although the tax has since been raised to 80
naye paise per imperial gallon, the consumption of this commodity has been increasing
rather rapidly. The growing imbalance between the internal production and consumption
of this commodity is causing a considerable drain on the foreign exchange resources
of the country. I, therefore, propose to raise the basic rate of duty by a further 25 naye
paise per imperial gallon. This will bring in a revenue of Rs.504 lakhs a year.
 66. Complete footwear manufactured in power operated factories was subjected
to an excise duty in 1955 but a large number of small scale units were kept out of the
scope of the taxation. Some of the larger units are reportedly adopting a deliberate
policy of decentralisation to evade taxation. Mainly to protect the revenue, I propose
to levy an excise duty on machine made soles and heels made of materials other than
leather or wood. The rate of duty win be 15 per cent ad valorem and will yield a
revenue of Rs.20 lakhs a year.
 67. In the field of textiles, I propose to make two changes with some revenue
significance. I propose to remove the existing total exemption on fabrics produced
from staple fibre yarn and cut pieces of cotton textiles, the so-called fents. The former
win now be treated on par with artificial silk fabrics. In the case of cut pieces, the
present definition is being revised and small specific duties, at levels substantially
below the fabric rates, will be levied. These changes are estimated to yield Rs.195
lakhs a year of which Rs.65 lakhs will accrue to the States.

 15

 68. Electric fans, bulbs and batteries were first made subject to excise in
1955 and no change has since been made in the rates of duty on these commodities.
The production trends indicate that these lines are expanding and they can bear an
increase in taxation. I propose to raise the existing duties by 50 per cent with a suitable
increase in the duty on components. These changes will yield a revenue of Rs.90 lakhs
a year.
 69. The tea industry has been complaining of the difficulties caused to it by
the imposition of a number of taxes at various stages by different agencies. We propose
to explore the possibility of removing this hardship by a suitable readjustment of the
excise duty, bearing in mind the financial interests of the State Governments concerned,
and the need to secure that their resources are not adversely affected. To enable this to
be done, we are raising the permissible maximum limit of the excise duty from 19
naye paise to 30 naye paise per lb. This is merely an enabling measure and does not
involve any change in the effective rates of the duty now imposed ranging, as the
House is aware, from 2 naye paise to 12 naye paise per lb.
 70. A few other minor readjustments are also being made about which 1 need
not weary the House. The total financial effect of these changes is to bring in an
additional revenue of Rs.27 lakhs a year of which Rs.5 lakhs will accrue to the States.
 71. The net affect of the various measures which I have mentioned is to increase
the revenue by Rs.21.73 crores, of which Rs.70 lakhs will accrue to the States.
 72. With regard to customs duties, I propose to make no change except for an
increase in the duty on wines and spirits and other alcoholic liquors. Following the
changes in excise duties, provision is being made, wherever necessary, for the levy of
a countervailing import duty, so that the indigenous producer is not placed at a
disadvantage. The changes in the customs levy are estimated to yield a revenue of
Rs.2.5 crores in the coming year.
DIRECT TAXATION
 73. I now turn to direct taxation. I do not propose to make any change in the
rate structure of personal income tax. With regard to company taxation, steps are
being taken to implement in its entirety the new scheme of company taxation introduced
in the current year’s budget. Formal action is being taken to abolish the Wealth Tax on
companies and the tax relating to excess dividends with effect from the financial year
commencing on the lst April, 1960.
 74. The House will remember that last year, for purposes of advance payment
for the assessment year ending the 31st March, 1961,1 had provisionally adopted a
rate of 45 per cent for company taxation. We have not had sufficient experience of the
effect of this rate. I do not, therefore propose to make any change in this rate but to
adopt it as the final figure. Smaller companies with a total income not exceeding
Rs.25,000 will continue to be assessed at a figure 5 per cent less. Last year I had
 16

promised to consider certain matters connected with the new system of company
taxation, and I am making two provisions in the Finance Bill, one relating to the
assessment of dividends paid out of profits taxed in the past and the other relating to
taxes on companies holding less than 50 per cent share in the capital of another
company, and have taken them into account in my estimates of revenue.
 75. I propose to make two changes in regard to the deduction of tax at
source. The House will remember that it was decided last year that tax should be
deducted at source at a rate of 30 per cent on dividends paid to resident individuals
and at 45 per cent on dividends paid to Indian companies. It has been represented
that this difference in the rate of deduction at source has given rise to some difficulties.
I therefore, propose to apply a uniform rate of 30 per cent for deduction of tax from
both the individuals and companies. In order that this change may not affect the
revenue receipts, I propose to amend Section IBA so as to enable Government to
collect from Indian companies the remaining 15 per cent as advance tax on the
dividends received by them.
 76. The existing provision with regard to the deduction at source from
dividends paid to preference shareholders also appears to be causing some difficulty.
The amount of the dividends which companies are required to pay to the shareholders
is governed by the terms of their contract with them and Government would not like,
as the current Finance Act implies, to make any assumptions regarding such amounts.
I accordingly propose in the Finance Bill to provide for the deduction at source from
the payments to these shareholders as in the case of any other dividends, leaving the
actual amounts of these dividends for the companies themselves to decide.
 77. I would now briefly refer to a few other proposals to amend the income-
tax Act. The period for which exemption is available under section 15C to new industrial
undertakings is proposed to be extended by a further five years. The limit up to which
donations for charitable purposes qualify for exemption from tax is proposed to be
increased from 5 per cent of total income or Rs.1,00,000 whichever is less, to 71 per
cent of total income or Rs.1,50,000 whichever is less. At present, the amounts paid to
scientific research associations and educational institutions to be used for scientific
research are allowed as deductions in computing the business income of the donor if
the scientific research is related to the class of business carried on by him. It is proposed
to allow this deduction even if the scientific research is not related to such business.
In respect of properties constructed before 1st April, 1950, the full amount of taxes
levied by a local authority and borne by the owner, is proposed to be allowed to be
deducted in computing the taxable income from the property, as against half the amount
of such taxes allowed at present. My next proposal is with regard to the taxation of co-
operative societies. At present, the business income of such societies is exempt from
tax. This exemption is justified having in view the objective of the Co-operative
Societies Act of 1912, namely, to facilitate the formation of co-operative societies for

 17

the promotion of thrift and self-help among agriculturists, artisans and persons of
limited means. However, as the House is aware, of late, co-operative societies have
widened their fields of activity and are carrying on substantial business involving
transactions of a large scale with non-members. There is no justification for a complete
tax exemption of business profits in their case. It is, therefore, proposed that while the
business incomes of co-operative societies connected with agriculture, rural credit
and cottage industries should continue to be wholly exempt from tax, the business
incomes of other societies should be exempt only up to a sum of Rs.10,000. These
proposals will not materially affect the revenue.
 78. A few amendments of a comparatively minor character are proposed to
Expenditure Tax and Gift Tax Acts. The amendments to the Expenditure Tax Act
provide for allowances for expenditure incurred on leave travel in India as well as
education of children in India. It is also proposed to allow in full the taxes paid by an
assessee to a foreign government instead of only a portion as at present. The amendment
to the Gift Tax Act provides that the advance tax payable will be at the same rate as
the tax payable on regular assessment. These changes are not expected to have any
significant effect on revenue.
NET EFFECT OF PROPOSALS
 79. I may now summarise the net effect of the budget proposals. The changes
in the Union Excise duties, exclusive of the revenue accruing to the States, are expected
to bring in an additional revenue of Rs.21.03 crores. Changes in the customs duties,
largely consequential on the changes in Union Excises, are expected to bring in Rs.2.5
crores. The total additional revenue would thus stand at Rs.23.53 crores, reducing the
revenue deficit from Rs.83.9 crores to Rs.60.37 crores and the overall deficit from
Rs.177 crores to Rs.153 crores. I propose to leave the revenue deficit uncovered; the
overall deficit will be met by the expansion of treasury bills.
CONCLUSION
 80. Next year’s budget would cover the last year of the current Plan and 1
would like to mention briefly what the position at the end of that year would be so far
as the implementation of the present Plan is concerned. In an earlier part of my speech,
I mentioned that at the end of the budget year, the total Plan outlay would have
reached a figure of about Rs.4,600 crores. During the current Plan period, we have, at
the Centre, raised substantial sums of revenue for meeting our Plan commitments
including the assistance provided to the States from the revenue budget. Over the
period of five years covered by the Plan, I expect that we would have an accumulated
revenue surplus of over Rs.50 crores, after meeting all our commitments for the Plan
and providing very substantial assistance to the States for implementing their Plans. I
know that there has been some criticism about the extent to which we have had to
resort to deficit financing for meeting the capital expenditure of the Plan. Even here,
I venture to suggest that our record has not been as bad as some of our critics make

 18

out. In the first three years of the Plan, the total amount of deficit financing amounted
to Rs.885 crores or so. In the current year, assuming that the State Governments do
not contribute to this in any significant measure and they are unlikely to do so, the
amount of deficit financing is likely to be Rs.190 crores. Taking a figure of Rs.153
crores for the coming year, the total amount of deficit financing during the Plan period
would have amounted to only a little over the sum of Rs.1,200 crores envisaged in the
Plan. Although our performance in the matter of savings has not been as, good as we
could wish, our record in the matter of raising resources and limiting deficit financing
to the minimum amount possible and practicable, has, I think, been quite good.
 81. There is, however, no reason to take a complacent view of the situation.
The end of the Second Plan merely marks the beginning of the Third Plan which will
require greater efforts and larger sacrifices on the part of the community if the country
has to sustain, as it inevitably must, a larger Plan. The path of our progress is bound
to be difficult until our economy gets over the hump and becomes self-generating.
Until this position is reached, which one might hope may be at the end of the next
Plan, we shall have to strain every nerve to mobilise the maximum resources, from
both taxation and savings, to enable the country to make the progress that is imperative
to our survival. It is perhaps a truism to say that no one, much less an under-developed
country like ours, can stand still or stay stagnant. We have to move forward and make
whatever sacrifices are necessary for this. I have no doubt that this will be done and
I would ask the House to consider the budget, which I am placing before it, against
this background.
 (FEBRUARY 29, 1960)




 19

