 PART B
 70. I now come to my proposals on fresh taxation.
 71. A gap of this magnitude cannot obviously be covered without a large tax
effort. However, in addition to mobilising the required resources, my tax proposals
aim at three objectives which, I think would be acceptable to everyone in this House.
In a country in which the bulk of the population lives below the poverty line disparities
in income have to be minimised. Such disparities lead to luxury consumption which
affects the propensity to save and the will to work hard. Therefore, tax policy should
seek to reduce such disparities.
 72. Secondly, they aim at increasing production and avoiding waste. Poverty
elimination requires primarily an increase in production. Since resources are scarce,
tax policy should prevent a diversion of resources to wasteful and unproductive uses
and conserve them for productive purposes. It should also discourage such consumption
as is positively injurious to people’s health.
 73. Thirdly, they aim at eliminating unemployment and underemployment by
stimulating agricultural production, by encouraging labour intensive techniques of
production and by improving the competitive capacity of small scale and cottage
industries in relation to large-scale industry.
 74. Let me take up direct taxes first.
 12

 75. I propose to raise only the rate of surcharge for Union purposes on income-
tax in the case of all categories of non-corporate taxpayers from 15 per cent to 20 per
cent. The effect of this proposal will be to raise the marginal rate of personal income-
tax from 69 per cent at present to 72 per cent. This measure will yield an additional
revenue of Rs.46 crores in a year. The accretion during 1979-80 will, however, be of
the order of Rs.37 crores. This is a small sacrifice I am asking the 35 lakh taxpayers,
who constitute an insignificant proportion of the total population, and who receive a
substantial share of the country’s income, to make for their poorer fellow citizens.
 76. I am aware of the views of the State Governments against recourse to
surcharge for Union purposes as the revenue accruing from surcharge is not shareable
with the States. But in framing my other fiscal proposals I have taken care to see that
the States get their legitimate share of the gains from the additional tax effort of the
Centre.
 77. Under the rate schedule prescribed in the Finance Act, 1978, in cases
where the taxable income exceeds the exemption limit by a small margin, the tax
liability is limited to 70 per cent of the excess over Rs.10, 000. This provision operates
rather harshly in some cases. In order to provide for a smoother progression in marginal
cases, I propose to limit the tax payable in such cases to 30 per cent of the excess over
Rs.10, 000. This will benefit individuals having incomes up to Rs.12, 000.
 78. In view of the Imperative need for resources, I propose to continue the
Compulsory Deposit Scheme for income-tax Payers for a further period of two years.
This will generate additional resources to the tune of Rs.160 crores during the financial
year 1979-80.
 79. Inequalities of wealth have even less justification than inequalities of
income. I, therefore, propose to raise the rates of wealth-tax on high slabs of net
wealth. The rate will now be 3 per cent, as against the current rate of 2.5 per cent, on
the net wealth between Rs.10 lakhs and Rs.15 lakhs and 5 per cent, as against 3.5 per
cent, on the net wealth over Rs.15 lakhs. The rates of wealth tax on slabs upto Rs.10
lakhs will remain unchanged. There will be corresponding changes in the rates
applicable to Hindu undivided families having one or more members with independent
net wealth exceeding the exemption limit. These changes will yield an additional
revenue of Rs.6.6 crores in a year. Since, however, the new rates of wealth-tax will
apply prospectively from the assessment year 1980-81, there will be no accretion to
revenue during 1979-80.
 80. It has to be recognised that by merely adjusting direct tax rates we cannot
reduce disparities in income and wealth to tolerable levels. As the House knows, tax
evasion which is the basic cause of generation of black money greatly affects.the
progressive impact of direct taxes. Black money is a corrosive influence which works
through the entire economy. It is Important that this scourge is fought through the
effective implementation of our tax laws. I wish to assure the House that I shall
address myself to this task with the utmost zeal and vigour.
 13

 81. As I am raising the surcharge on income-tax on personal incomes, I think
the corporate sector should also be required to contribute a little more to the exchequer.
I accordingly propose to raise the surcharge on income-tax in the case of companies
from 5 per cent to 7.5 per cent. This will not cast a heavy burden on them, because the
effective rate of taxation on corporations is lower than the nominal rates. This measure
will yield an additional revenue of about Rs.35 crores in a year. The accretion during
the year 1979- 80 will, however, be of the order of Rs.28 crores.
 82. The scheme of taxation of capital gains was modified in 1977 in several
directions. One of the changes made was to provide for exemption from income-tax
on long-term capital gains If the sale proceeds of any asset were re-invested within six
months in certain preferred assets. Since asset owners secure capital gains largely
through no effort on their own part, this exemption confers an unfair advantage on
asset holders as compared to income earners and thus contributes to the disparity in
society. I, therefore, propose to withdraw this exemption of capital gains in respect of
transfers made after 28th February, 1979. This measure will yield an additional revenue
of Rs.14 crores annually. Since, however, advance tax is not payable in respect of
capital gains, there will be no accretion to revenue during the year 1979-80.
 83. The present concessions in respect of long-term savings through life
insurance premia, provident fund contributions and other approved forms of savings,
though they subserve certain desirable social and economic objectives, give a
disproportionately large tax benefit to taxpayers in higher income brackets. At present,
100 per cent deduction is allowed in respect of first Rs.5,000 of qualifying savings, 50
per cent on the next Rs.5,000 of such savings and 40 per cent on the balance. Under
my proposal, while the first Rs.5,000 of qualifying savings will continue to be eligible
for 100 per cent deduction, the deduction in respect of the next Rs.5,000 of such
savings will be reduced to 35 per cent and in respect of the balance to 20 per cent.
This measure will yield Rs.9.6 crores annually. The accretion during the financial year
1979-80 will be Rs.7.6 crores.
 84. I propose to lower the threshold for payment of advance tax by the
registered firms from Rs.30, 000 to Rs.20, 000. This measure will yield an additional
revenue of Rs.12 crores during 1979-80.
 85. The large scale unemployment in the country requires the promotion of
labour intensive techniques instead of capital intensive techniques. While it may be
true that in some industries the choice of techniques is limited, our preference should
be for labour intensive methods of production wherever feasible. Our fiscal laws and
tax concessions in particular should be so designed as to foster production techniques
which enlarge opportunities for employment.
 86. I, therefore, propose to appoint an Expert Committee of economists and
tax administrators to study the impact of concessions provided for in our tax laws -
particularly those relating to corporation tax and Central excise-on the techniques of
 14

production used in industry and make recommendations which will encourage the
adoption of labour intensive methods of production. The composition of the Committee
and its terms of reference will be settled soon and it will be asked to submit its Report
with the least possible dealy.
 87. One of the tax concessions which is related to the employment of capital
is the ‘tax holiday,, provision in the income-tax Act. This concession is at present
available in respect of all industrial undertakings that go into production before 1st
April, 1981. I propose to withdraw this concession in the case of industrial undertakings
engaged in non-priority industries listed in the Eleventh Schedule to the income-tax
Act, if they go into production after 31st March, 1979.
 88. In recent years, commercial banks, particularly public sector banks, have
been asked to reach out into the rural areas and to expand rural credit. in order to
promote rural banking and to assist the scheduled commercial banks in making adequate
provisions from their current income to provide for risks in rural advances, I propose
to amend the income-tax Act to grant a deduction in respect of provisions made for
bad and doubtful debts by scheduled commercial banks relating to advances made bv
their rural branches. Such a deduction will, however” be limited to 1.5 per cent of the
aggregate average advances made by the rural branches. This measure will result in a
revenue loss of Rs.12 crores during 1979-80 but it will be in a good cause.
 89. I have earlier referred to the exemption from the corporation tax which
I wish to extend to the Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation. This
is in line with a similar exemption already being enjoyed by the Industrial
Development Bank of India. This decision will result in a revenue loss of Rs.5
crores annually. The loss during 1979-80 is estimated at Rs.10 crores because advance
tax paid during 1978-
 79 also is refundable.
 90. At present, expenditure incurred by companies and co-operative societies
on approved programmes of rural development qualifies for deduction in computing
their taxable profits. For this purpose, the programme has to be approved by the
“prescribed authority”, which is an Inter-Ministerial Committee headed by the
Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation. Companies and co-operative
societies have shown considerable interest in rural development programmes. To
expedite the clearance of such schemes of rural development, I propose to provide
that they will henceforth be approved at the State level by a Committee consisting
of the Commissioner of Income tax and a senior officer of the State Government
nominated by it.
 91. I also propose to exempt from income-tax donations made by tax-payers
to approved institutions engaged in imparting training to persons to equip them for
implementing rural development programmes.
 15

 92. At present, taxpayers engaged in business or profession alone are entitled
to 100 per cent deduction in respect of donations made to approved institutions engaged
in carrying out programmes of rural development. I propose to extend this concession
to other categories of taxpayers as well. A similar dispensation will be extended to
donations for scientific research made to approved scientific research associations,
universities, colleges and other institutions.
 93. I propose to provide that insurance premia paid by federal milk co-operative
societies for insuring cattle belonging to members of affiliated primary co-operative
societies shall be allowed to be deducted in computing their taxable profits.
 94. In order to promote the cultivation of mushrooms, I propose to exempt
from income-tax one-third of the income derived from the business of mushroom
growing under controlled conditions, or Rs.10, 000, whichever is higher.
 95. As Hon’ble Members are aware, the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1977 has
conferred exemption from income-tax on the Khadi and Village Industries Commission.
I now propose to exempt from income-tax the income of the State Khadi and Village
Industries Boards set up under the State Acts.
 96. Consumer co-operative societies have been doing commendable work
in supplying goods to consumers at reasonable prices. In order to encourage the
development of such societies so that they can play a proper part in the public
distribution system that is sought to be developed, I propose to raise the quantum
of tax-exempt profits in the case of such societies from the present level of
Rs.20,000 to Rs.40,000.
 97. The scope of section 35B of the income-tax Act relating to export markets
development allowance was curtailed last year. I have referred earlier to the decline in
exports in the current year and the need to promote them. Therefore to enable exporters
to develop export markets on a long-term basis, I propose to liberalise the scope of the
export markets development allowance. A weighted deduction under section 35B of
the income-tax will now be available to all exporters at a uniform rate of 133.3 per
cent of the qualifying expenditure. For this purpose, expenditure on advertisement or
publicity outside India in respect of the goods, services or facilities dealt in or provided
by the taxpayer in the course of his business will be included in the qualifying
expenditure. This concession will result in a revenue loss of about Rs.5 crores annually.
The loss in 1979-80 will, however, be of the order of Rs.4 crores.
 98. In order to encourage the writing of University level text books in Findi
and other Indian languages, I propose to allow a deduction equal to 25 per cent of the
income derived by the authors of such books. Authors of dictionaries and encyclopaedias
in these languages will also get the benefit of a similar deduction in the computation
of their taxable income. This concession will be available for the assessment year
1980-81 and four subsequent years.
 16

 99. While I want to step up the drive against tax evasion, I also would like
to promote greater expedition in the settlement of income-tax cases. At present. the
income tax Settlement Commission is debarred from proceeding with a case if the
Commissioner of income-tax objects to the application being proceeded with on
certain grounds. The Direct Tax Laws Committee has recommended that the
application for settlement should be rejected only after the Commission is satisfied
that the objection has been raised by the Commissioner on proper and valid grounds.
I propose to implement this recommendation subject to the safeguard that before
over ruling the objection raised by the Commissioner of income-tax, the Settlement
Commission should hear him.
 100. The Direct Tax Laws Committee has also proposed certain amendments
to the income-tax Act and the Wealth-tax Act with a view to plugging some loopholes
in the provisions relating to prevention of tax avoidance through intra-family transfers
of income and wealth. I have accepted their recommendations and given effect to
them through the Finance Bill.
 101. As I mentioned earlier the second objective of my proposals is to prevent
the life style of the affluent sections from having an adverse impact on saving and
investment through the demonstration effect. In this connection, the lavish manner in
which expenditure is incurred on accommodation and entertainment in luxury hotels
calls for serious notice. With a view to checking such conspicuous consumption in
luxury hotels, I propose to levy a new tax on the gross receipts of hotels. Since it is my
intention that States should continue to levy sales tax as hitherto on items of food and
drink supplied to guests in hotels, the sale proceeds of these items will not be included
in the tax base. The details of this new measure are being worked out and the necessary
legislation in this regard will be introduced in Parliament soon.
 102. Other changes being made in the income-tax law through the Finance Bill
are of minor significance and are largely in the nature of clarification and rationalisation
of existing provisions.
 103. The total addition to revenues from an these tax measures will be Rs.101.2
crores in a full year and Rs.58.6 crores during 1979-80. Of this, about Rs.12 crores
will accrue to the States as their share in 1979-80. Besides, additional resources of
Rs.160 crores will accrue in 1979-80 from the continuance of the Compulsory Deposit
Scheme for income-tax Payers.
 104. I now turn to indirect taxes.
 105. I would like to straightaway indicate the more significant reliefs in excise
duties which I propose to provide. The Central excise duties on all chemical fertilizers,
will be reduced to 50 per cent of the existing rates. This will mean that the basic
Central excise duty on urea, which is the most important chemical fertilizer, will be
reduced from 15 per cent ad valorem to 7-1/2 per cent ad valorem; that on single and
 17

triple super phosphate fertilizer will be reduced from 7.5 per cent to 3.75 per cent ad
valorem. This reduction will also be correspondingly reflected in the countervailing
duties leviab7e on imported chemical fertilizers. With this change, it should be possible
to reduce the price of urea by about Rs.100 per tonne. The prices of other kinds of
fertilizers will also become lower with reference to the excise duty relief now
announced. This decision would result in a sacrifice of revenue of Rs.75.6 crores
under Central excise and Rs.30 crores under customs.
 106. Although the number of electric pumpsets is increasing rapidly with
increasing rural electrification, farmers have still to use pumpsets driven by diesel
engines in large parts of our country. As a measure of relief to this large class I
propose to reduce the excise duty on light diesel oil from the existing level of Rs.155.72
per kilolitre to Rs.75 per kilolitre. I am aware that only 45 per cent of this oil is used
in the agricultural sector. Since It is difficult to monitor end use and a significant
quantity of even the balance is used for generating power and by small industry, I
propose to extend the benefit of this reduction in excise duty to an users without any
distinction. The loss to the exchequer on account of this concession will be Rs.12.40
crores per annum.
 107. I also propose to exempt power tillers imported by State Agro-Industries
Corporations and the Central Government totally from customs duty as these
implements can promote agricultural production in small holdings. Hon’ble Members
may be aware that indigenously manufactured power tillers are already exempt from
Central excise duties.
 108. Pipes made of PVC resins can reduce seepage and wastage of water in
fields and thereby increase the effectiveness of irrigation. Since I wish to make this
raw material available at cheaper prices for the manufacture of PVC pipes for irrigation
and at the same time prevent a misuse of the concession for other purposes, I propose,
as an experimental measure, to exempt PVC resins imported for the purpose from
customs duties as soon as the modalities of a scheme which will serve both the
objectives have been worked out.
 109. I would also refer to the relief in the field of drugs and medicines. I
propose to fully exempt from customs duties 22 specified bulk drugs required for the
formulation of life saving drugs, and to reduce the customs duty on 17 specified bulk
drug intermediates from a total of 75 per cent ad valorem to 25 per cent ad valorem.
On the excise side, I propose to exempt patent or proprietary medicines, including life
saving drugs, from the levy of the special excise duty. Taking these measures together,
the revenue sacrifice is estimated to be of the order of Rs.7.04 crores a year.
 110. I now turn to a proposal of far reaching significance. This concerns un-
manufactured tobacco, excise on which dates back to the year 1943. This levy brings
the excise machinery into contact with a large number of growers and licensees. I
propose to completely exempt un-manufactured tobacco from excise duties, including
 18

additional excise duties and thus, relieve at one stroke, nearly a million tobacco growers,
curers, small dealers and warehouse licensees from excise control. I have no doubt
that this bold decision to do away with a vexatious levy-a legacy of the colonial era -
will be widely welcomed by farmers in the tobacco growing tracts of our country.
This measure would involve loss of central excise revenue of the order of Rs.121.20
crores. I, however, propose to recoup Rs.115.71 crores of this loss through suitable
upward adjustments in the rates of duties on manufactured tobacco products.
 111. I shall touch upon cigarettes later. For the present, I shall deal with the
other manufactured tobacco products. In respect of branded biris, the present tobacco
stage duty plus biri duty comes to about E s. 3 per thousand biris; I propose to fix a
consolidated rate of E s. 3.60 per thousand branded biris. Unbranded biris produced
by manufacturers of both branded and unbranded biris will pay the same duty. At
present unbranded biris are exempt from biri duty; but they are subject to tobacco
stage duty which works to about ninety paise per thousand biris. I propose to levy a
nominal consolidated duty of Rs.1.60 per thousand on other unbranded biris. However,
to provide relief to the really small manufacturers of unbranded biris I propose to
exempt manufacturers who produce only unbranded biris from payment of duty on
their clearances of the first 60 lakh biris in a year. I also propose to make suitable
upward duty adjustments in respect of chewing tobacco, snuff and smoking mixtures.
I also propose to levy a duty of 20 per cent ad. valorem on branded manufactured
hookah tobacco.
 112. As an interim measure, I propose to provide for suitable relief in product
stage duty in the case of those products manufactured out of duty-paid un-manufactured
tobacco except in respect of smoking mixtures and manufactured hookah tobacco.
 113. Hon’ble Members will recall that the Indirect Taxation Enquiry Committee
under Shri L.K.Jha submitted Part II of its final report in January, 1978. The Committee
has indicated the broad lines on which rationalisation of the excise tariff should be
attempted both in the short term as well as in the long term. I have given close and
careful consideration to, the Committee’s recommendations. A major restructuring of
the excise tariff has to be ruled out in view of the need for resources and, on other
pragmatic considerations. Also there is reason to apprehend that a major departure
from the present pattern of excise taxation may upset the balance between different
sectors of production. However, as part of the follow-up action on the Committee’s
recommendations, I have attempted to restructure the excise duty rates on a wide
range of consumer and finished products.
 114. Let me state at the outset that as a result of this restructuring, the number
of effective excise duty rates have been reduced from 28 to 16 in respect of commodities
covered by the present exercise. I have also availed of this opportunity to introduce
further progression in the duty structure and stepped up the duty on quite a few luxury
and semi-luxury items. Excise duties are being increased on cosmetics and toilet
 19

preparations (other than perfumed hair oil) from 63 per cent to 100 per cent, on air-
conditioners from 105 per cent to 110 per cent, on parts of refrigerating and air
conditioning machinery from 105 per cent to 125 per cent, on stereo and hi-fi equipment
from 36.75 per cent to 40 per cent, on higher priced television sets from 21 per cent
to 30 per cent, on higher priced radios and radiograms from 36.75 per cent to 40 per
cent. I have maintained the duty differential of 15 per cent ad valorem in respect of
those electronic products where such duty differential exists for small scale units.
 115. I have also taken this opportunity to step up suitably the duty rates on
durable consumer articles on the consideration that the outlay on these Items is mostly
of a non-recurring nature and the incidence of duty is spread over a period of time. In
this category. I propose to increase excise duties on pressure cookers from 10.5 per
cent to 15 per cent, on steel furniture from 21 per cent to 25 per cent, on domestic
electrical appliances from 26.25 per cent to 30 per cent and on safes and strong boxes
from 21 per cent to 35 per cent.
 116. I have also selected some consumer Items like soap, tooth paste, tooth
brush and detergents, for increase in duties taking care, at the same time, to see that
the goods produced by the small units in the decentralised sector are not adversely
affected by this increase. Excise duties will go up on household and laundry soap
from 5.25 per cent to 20 per cent, on low priced toilet soap from 10. 5 per cent to 15
per cent, on high priced toilet soap from 15.75 per cent to 20 per cent, on detergents
from 13.13 per cent to 20 per cent and on tooth paste from 10.5 per cent to 25 per
cent. I also propose to impose a 25 per cent duty on tooth brushes. Let me state clearly
that my objective in increasing the rates on these commodities is partly to ensure that
the small-scale manufacturers, with the advantage of duty exemption, are able to
increase their share of the market for these products.
 117. Among food Items, I have avoided imposing any further burden on articles
of mass consumption such as processed edible oils or vanaspati. I have, in fact, reduced
the duty on vanaspati by exempting it from special excise duty. However, I have
considered Items like prepared or preserved food, instant coffee, biscuits, processed
cheese, cocoa powder, chewing gum and chocolate as fit for further increases, bearing
in mind the sections of the society that consume such items. Thus, excise duties are
increased on instant coffee from 21 per cent to 25 per cent, on prepared or preserved
food, biscuits and processed cheese from 10.5 per cent to 15 per cent, and on cocoa
powder, chewing gum and chocolates from 10.5 per cent to 20 per cent. in aerated
waters, I propose to increase the duty rate on plain soda from 15.75 per cent to 20 per
cent. In respect of other aerated waters I propose to have two rates - one of 60 per cent
for those containing caffeine and the other of 30 per cent for those not containing
caffeine. I also propose to withdraw the present concessional rate applicable to
clearances of the first 50 lakh bottles in a financial year. However, the existing
exemptions in respect of aerated waters in favour of small manufacturers will continue.
 20

 118. In restructuring the duty rates on consumer products, I have reduced the
incidence on a number of Items by exempting them from special excise duty. I would
like to make particular mention of the duty reduction from 42 per cent to 30 per cent
on fluorescent lighting tubes, which are widely used for street lighting and which help
in reducing the consumption of electricity. J also propose to extend the scope of the
present excise exemption for low priced footwear valued upto Rs.5 per pair to footwear
valued upto Rs.10 per pair.
 119. I have also rationalised the rates applicable to personalised modes of
transport. Moped, which are used by comparatively less affluent people and consume
less fuel, will bear a lower duty of 10 per cent as against the existing rate of about
13.1 per cent. Scooters, motor cycles and threewheelers will bear 20 per cent as
against the existing rate of 13.13 per cent while cars will pay duty at 25 per cent as
against the existing rate of 18.38 per cent. The concessional rate applicable to cars
used as taxis and auto-rickshaws will be increased from 10 per cent to 15 per cent.
The rate on commercial vehicles will also go up marginally from 13.1 per cent to 15
per cent as part of the scheme of rationalisation.
 120. In manufactured inputs, I have mainly confined myself to streamlining
the existing rates having regard to their usage and their relative importance. The details
of these changes are contained in the Budget papers.
 121. Another tax reform suggested by the Indirect Taxation Enquiry Committee
is to extend proforma credit facilities in respect of the duty paid on, inputs used in the
manufacture of finished products. Presently, such facilities are available in a limited
area. Wide extension of these facilities as recommended by the Committee would
have major revenue implications apart from throwing additional administrative burden
in working these procedures. However, industry has been urging that this measure be
given a trial. I propose to extend, as an experimental measure, the provision of proforma
credit to some of the products of the engineering industry, where the incidence of duty
on inputs is perceptible. While doing so, I have also proposed upward rate adjustments
in respect of some of the final products. The details of these changes are available in
the Budget papers.
 122. The net revenue effect of the proposals for restructuring the Central excise
tariff, along with a few minor changes in some of the items affected, is a gain of about
Rs.100 crores in a full year.
 123. 1 now turn to substantive proposals to raise resources.
 124. On the excise side, the most important proposals relate to a few major
products of the petroleum group. Hon’ble Members are aware that the OPEC countries
have announced a phased programme of increase in the price of crude oil. We are still,
to a significant extent, dependent on imports of crude oil and the anticipated increase
in the out-flow of foreign exchange consequent on the increases in crude prices is
 21

substantial. After the initial drop in consumption of petroleum products in the wake of
the steep increase in crude prices in the year 1973, consumption has registered a
sizable upward trend. From the point of view of evolving a viable energy policy which
minimises the strain on our foreign exchange resources, I have no doubt that it is
essential to restrain the consumption of the more important petroleum products. My
revenue proposals have been formulated keeping this important objective in mind.
 125. I propose to raise the Central excise duty on motor spirit from the existing
level of Rs.2253.88 to Rs.2750 per kilolitre. Since the bulk of the consumption of
petrol is by the upper classes in society I have no regrets in doing this. I also propose
to raise the duty on high speed diesel oil from the existing level of Rs.404. 04 to
Rs.500 per kilolitre because of the rapid growth in its consumption.
 126. As Hon’ble Members are aware, kerosene was being used, in the past, to
adulterate high speed diesel oil when there was i price differential in favour of kerosene.
It has been our endeavour in the last few years to check this tendency by maintaining,
as far as possible. parity between the rates of duty on these two products. Besides, we
have had, in the recent past, to rely heavily on imports of kerosene. Bearing these
considerations in mind, I propose to increase the duty on kerosene from the existing
level of Rs.408. 19 to Rs.500 per kilolitre. I also propose to effect a sympathetic
increase in the rate of duty on liquefied petroleum gas, which is primarily used as
cooking fuel in urban and semi-urban areas, from the existing level of Rs.262. 50 per
metric tonne to Rs.400 per metric tonne.
 127. My proposals relating to the petroleum products are expected to yield
an additional revenue of Rs.223. 25 crores under Central excise and Rs.55.7 crores
under customs.
 128. Next, I propose to increase the rate of duty on the residuary heading Item
68 of the Central Excise Tariff from the existing level of 5 per cent to 8 per cent ad
valorem. This will yield an additional revenue of Rs.100 crores. As Hon’ble Members
are aware, there is already a provision for giving set off of the duty paid on goods
falling under item 68 which are used in the manufacture of other excisable goods. The
increased levy should, therefore, not have any appreciable cascading effect.
 129. As the House is aware, small scale manufacturers producing goods falling
under Item 68, whose clearances of all excisable goods during the preceding year had
not exceeded Rs.30 lakhs, 13resently enjoy exemption from duty payable on their first
clearances upto a value of Rs.30 lakhs. There have been persistent representations that
in computing the eligibility of a small-scale unit for this concession, the value of
goods falling under iterns other than Item 68 should be excluded. There have also
been demands that clearances for exports should be excluded so that the units in the
small-scale sector are encouraged to step up their export efforts. I accept the validity
of these demands. Keeping these as well as the proposed increase in duty under Item
68 in view, I propose to rationalise the existing scheme of exemption. Under the
 22

revised scheme which would be effective from 1st April, 1979, small scale
manufacturers whose clearances for home consumption of goods falling under Item
68 in the preceding financial year did not exceed Rs.30 lakhs
 would enjoy complete exemption from the duty payable under item 68, on their
first clearances of a value upto Rs.15 lakhs; they would pay duty at 4 per cent, which
is half of the rate of duty proposed for this item, on clearances between Rs.15 lakhs
and Rs.30 lakhs.
 130. As the Hon’ble Members are aware, the scheme of excise duty concession
to encourage higher production in selected industries, which was announced in the
year 1978, is due to expire on 31.3.1979. I do not propose to continue the scheme
beyond this date. This withdrawal is expected to yield an additional revenue of
Rs.40 crores.
 131. I have also taken this opportunity to review a number of existing
notifications and I propose to modify or withdraw some of them. The details of this
will be found in the Budget papers.
 132. In my search for additional resources I have, of necessity, to fall back
upon the old faithful, cigarettes. I have already referred to the withdrawal of the
duty on tobacco at the unmanufactured stage which is borne by cigarettes. I now
propose to adjust the rate structure on cigarettes in such a way as to further secure
an additional sum of Rs.60 crores from this item. Taking into account the revenue
expected to accrue from this measure and the recasting of the rate structure applicable
to the manufactured tobacco products, which I have referred to earlier, the States
share in respect of additional excise duty in lieu of sales tax will go up by Rs.18.31
crores a year.
 133. As Hon’ble Members are aware, the excise duty mechanism has been
used consciously to encourage the production of matches in the non-mechanised sector.
I propose to carry this process further by stepping up the duty on matches produced by
the mechanised sector from the existing level of Rs.4. 83 pet gross boxes of 50 matches
to Rs.9. 20. I also propose to round off the existing level of duty applicable to the non-
mechanised sector, other than cottage units, from the existing level of Rs.4. 52 to
Rs.4. 50. As regards cottage sector units, I propose to reduce the duty applicable to
them from Rs.3. 36 to Rs.1. 60. I am sure this package of measures will result in a
further accelerated growth of the non-mechanised sector in general and cottage units
in particular. The additional revenue yield from this measure is expected to be of the
order of Rs.8 crores during a year.
 134. Machine-made carpets produced in a few organised units constitute an
Item of elite consumption. I can see no justification for encouraging this line of
production when we have a large number of traditional carpet weavers whose skills
have. won international renown. I would not like the livelihood of these weavers to
 23

be threatened by the proliferation of machine-made carpets. I, therefore, propose to
impose a duty of 30 per cent on such machine-made carpets. Handmade carpets will
be totally exempt from this levy. The estimated additional yield from this proposal
is Rs.1.9 crores.
 135. Consistent with the above approach, with a view to encouraging labour
oriented non-power processing sector of the, cotton textile industry, I propose to
withdraw the concessional rate of 8 per cent ad valorem on power-processed white
powerloom cotton fabrics of finer varieties so that such fabrics also pa the same rate
of 1.2 per cent ad valorem as is applicable to other power-processed fabrics.
 136. This Government is committed to the encouragement of the handloom
sector. The competitive capacity of handloom fabrics in relation to fabrics produced
by powerlooms and composite mills has to be improved further. I, therefore, propose
to increase the excise duty on cotton and cellulosic spun yarn of finer counts used by
composite textile mills and powerlooms by about 10 per cent of the existing rates.
Details of these changes are available in the Budget papers. Additional revenue expected
from these measures is about Rs.10 crores.
 137. The special duties of excise imposed as a part of the 1978 Budget are due
to expire on 31.3.1979. I propose to continue these levies for another year at the
existing rate of 1/20th of the effective basic excise duties. However, it is proposed to
exempt from this levy items in respect of which rates have been restructured as well
as the new levies; the existing exemption in respect of electricity, coal and Item 68
will also be continued.
 138. I shall now deal with the proposals concerning customs duties. The most
important of them relates to withdrawal of the existing exemption from countervailing
duties of customs applicable to imported goods, which attract classification under
Item 68 of the Central Excise Tariff. When this residuary entry was introduced in that
Tariff in 1975, Imported goods were exempt from the corresponding countervailing
duty of customs. This exemption which was initially granted when the excise duty on
indigenous goods was 1 per cent ad valorem has continued, even though the rate has
successively been stepped up to 5 per cent. As I have already state I have proposed a
further increase in the Central excise duty under item 68, from 5 per cent to 8 per cent
ad valorem. In this context and as a measure of protection to the indigenous goods
classifiable under-item 68, I propose to withdraw the existing exemption in respect of
imported goods. In withdrawing this exemption, however, I have not proposed any
change in the duty in regard to project imports and also the (items of machinery on
which the customs duty was, in the recent past, reduced to 25 per cent ad valorem on
the consideration that such machinery is not indigenously produced. This measure
will yield an additional revenue of Rs.96 crores by way of countervailing duty.
 139. In the context of the sizable gap between supply and demand of edible
oils, substantial imports of these oils have taken place in the past and are continuing.

 24

As a means of assuring remunerative prices to indigenous producers of oil seeds, I
propose to levy basic customs duty on palm oil, rapeseed oil, soyabean oil, sunflower
oil and palmolein oil at 121 per cent ad valorem. They will, however, be exempt from
auxiliary and countervailing duties. This measu-re is expected to yield an additional
revenue of Rs.33.5 crores.
 140. It is proposed to continue the auxiliary duties of customs for the next
financial year at the existing levels.
 141. Taking Union excise duties and customs duties together, my proposals
will lead to a net revenue gain of Rs.606.14 crores in a full year, of which Rs.413.15
crores will accrue to the Centre and Rs.192.99 crores to the States.
 142. Where changes are proposed to be made by notifications, effective from
the 1st March, 1979, copies of such notifications will be laid on the Table of the
House in due course.
 143. Members are aware that in respect of every international journey paid for
in Indian currency, Foreign Travel Tax is being collected from passengers. In order to
simplify the administration of the tax, and to guard against the possibility of evasion,
I propose to revise the scheme and replace the ad-valorem levy with a specific one.
The new arrangements will be-brought into force as soon as possible after legislation
in this behalf is enacted. This measure will not have any significant revenue effect.
 144. I have now a few words to say on behalf of my colleague, the Minister of
Communications. As Hon’ble Members are aware, the unit costs of a number of our
postal services exceed the revenues they fetch. Moreover, the modernisation of
telecommunication services involves large capital investment. These factors necessitate
an increase in postal and telecommunication tariffs. A memorandum showing the
proposed tariffs is being circulated along with the Budget papers. The letter card
(inland letter) and the letter will cost five paise more. The rate for the post card has
been left untouched. As regards telecommunication tariffs, the ordinary telegram of 8
words will cost Rs.2.25 as against Rs.2 at present and each additional word will cost
30 paise as against 25 paise at present. The rate for Press telegrams will however
remain unchanged. Local call charges, beyond 1750 calls per quarter, will be 40 paise
per call, as against 30 paise at present. I will not go into other details which are given
in the memorandum. The tariff revisions, which will be given effect to from a date to
be notified by the Government after the Finance Bill is passed, are estimated to result
in additional revenue of Rs.57.96 crores per annum, The yield during 1979-80 is
placed at Rs.48.30 crores and has been accounted for in estimating the internal resources
of the Posts and Telegraphs.
 145. Our tax effort will bring in about Rs.665 crores, of which Rs.205 crores
will accrue to the States leaving Rs.460 crores with the Centre. Taking also into account
Rs.160 crores of accretions of compulsory deposits by income-tax payers, there will
 25

be a residual deficit of Rs.1355 crores, which I propose to leave uncovered. I have
assessed carefully the inflationary potential of a deficit of this size. The large food
output of the current year, the large stocks of food and other commodities that we
have, the large volume of foreign exchange reserves and a continuation of the current
supply management and restrictionist monetary policies give me confidence that we
shall be able to maintain reasonable price stability in the coming year.
 146. With this I have come to the end of my labours. I have attempted in this
budget to put the maximum emphasis on agricultural and rural development and labour
intensive industry, because it is now accepted by all that only that way can we eradicate
poverty and unemployment in the country. I have, however, not neglected large Industry
and infrastructure in the process. On the contrary, I have positively encouraged them.
But I have no sympathy with those industries which cater to the wants of the rich. We
can have no room for production which caters to the rich and is thus a visible
manifestation of the disparities which exist in society.
 147. The elimination of the kind of poverty which exists in our country cannot
be achieved overnight. It is a long process which involves large investment through
the mobilisation of surplus resources wherever they exist in society, better organisation
and the development and transfer of appropriate know how to millions of small persons
engaged in agriculture and allied occupations and village industries throughout the
country. The ultimate objective is not merely to raise the standard of living of the poor
but to build a society of men and women with skills, resources, imagination, and
above all, hope. I like to think that this budget is a small step in that direction. But its
success really depends upon a national consensus about the desirability of the objective
and the need to work hard for it and a willingness on the part of the powerful and
affluent sections of society to make the necessary sacrifices. I seek the help of this
House in achieving such a consensus and securing the required sacrifices.
 (February 28, 1979)




 26

