 PART B
 53. Less than ten months ago Parliament approved proposals involving very
substantial additions to taxation of a magnitude rarely equalled in peace time. These
covered not merely the extension of existing taxes but the levy of new taxes such as
the tax on wealth and the tax on expenditure. All these measures resulted in a major
reorientation of the tax structure of the country. I do not propose to make any major
modification in it but to confine myself to making such improvements as are necessary
to make the present pattern of taxation an integrated one, and to plug any loopholes in
taxation.
DIRECT TAXATION
 54. I shall first deal with direct taxation. My first proposal is to introduce a
tax on gifts which will fill a gap in the scheme of direct taxation and would not only
make evasion or avoidance difficult but also spread the tax burden more equitably.
 55. The idea of a Gift Tax is not new. Many Honourable Members have stressed
both in this House and the other House the need for introducing such a measure at an
early date. The transfer of properties through gifts to one’s near relations or associates
is one of the commonest forms of avoidance of not only the Estate Duty but also of
Income-tax, Wealth Tax and even the Expenditure Tax. The only way of effectively
checking this practice is to levy a tax on gifts. Such a tax is already being levied in
other countries, for example, U.S.A., Canada, Japan and Australia. The Taxation Enquiry

 12

Commission also had accepted the Gift Tax as theoretically an attractive proposition.
 56. It is proposed to levy a tax on gifts by whomsoever made, the only
exceptions being charitable institutions, government companies, corporations
established by Central or State Acts and public companies whose affairs are controlled
by six persons or more. The tax will be levied on the donor on the value of all gifts
made by him during a year but for the purpose of determining the rate of duty, the
gifts made during the four years preceding the year will be aggregated. Such aggregation
will, of course, be made only in respect of gifts made after the date this tax comes into
force. Gifts upto a total value of Rs.10,000 in any one year will be exempt and if the
value of gifts made during any year exceeds this sum, only the excess will be subjected
to tax. This basic exemption of Rs.10,000 will be reduced to Rs.5,000 if gifts to any
one individual donee during a year exceeds Rs.3,000. In addition to this basic
exemption, there are other exemptions, important among which are:-
 (a) gifts to Central and State Governments, Local Authorities and charitable
 institutions:
 (b) gifts to female dependants on the occasion of marriage upto Rs.10,000 in
 each case;
 (c) gifts to one’s wife upto a total limit of Rs.1 lakh;
 (d) gifts to dependants of policies of insurance upto Rs.10,000 for each.
 The rates of tax will be the same as for the Estate Duty, the only difference
being that the first slab of Rs.50,000 will not be exempted from the tax. The rates of
tax range from 4 per cent on the first slab to 40 per cent on gifts over Rs.50 lakhs. The
administrative set up and the procedure for assessment, appeal and collection of tax
will be the same as for income-tax, Wealth Tax and Expenditure Tax.
 57. The main object of this tax is to plug a loophole in the other tax statutes.
Its importance cannot, therefore, be adequately measured in terms of the amount of
revenue it brings directly. We have no reliable data for making an estimate of the
yield, and on a rough guess the yield from the Gifts Tax has been placed at Rs.3
crores. A bill for the levy of this tax is being introduced separately.
 58. My second proposal is to make certain amendments in the Estate Duty
Act. The actual collections of Estate Duty have fallen short of even the modest
expectation we had at the time of passing that measure. This is partly due to the
practice of making large gifts inter vivos which will, hereafter, be checked by the levy
of the Gift Tax. It is also partly due to the numerous concessions provided in the Act
itself, and I propose to reduce some of them. The important changes are:-
 (a) The exemption limit will be reduced from Rs.1,00,000 to Rs.50,000.
 (b) Only one-half of the probate duty or court fees paid on succession
 certificates will be allowed as a deduction from estate duty instead of the
 full amount as at present.
 (c) Gifts to other than those for charitable purposes made within a period of

 13

 two years prior to death are now subjected to estate duty. It is proposed to
 increase this period to five years, as recommended by the Taxation Enquiry
 Commission. Gifts on which gift tax has been paid will not be taken into
 account.
 (d) The value of coparcenery interest in Hindu Undivided Families will be
 taxed at the rate applicable to the value of the estate of the branch of the
 family concerned.
 The effect of these changes will be to increase the revenue by Rs.50 lakhs
which will accrue wholly to the States.
 59. Honourable Members are aware that the Estate Duty Act has departed
from the other fiscal statutes in vesting the appellate powers with the Central Board of
Revenue. Now that we have gained some experience in the working of this Act, it is
proposed to bring the appellate procedure in line with the provisions in the income
Tax, Wealth Tax and Expenditure Tax Acts. A bill amending the Estate Duty Act is
being introduced separately.
 60. So far as income Tax is concerned, no major change in the rate structure
is proposed to be made. For the next financial year the basic rates of tax, together with
the special surcharges in operation for the current financial year, will continue. The
only change which I propose to make is in regard to the excess dividend super-tax
payable by Section 23A companies. At present, the excess dividend tax rates for all
companies are 10 per cent 20 per cent and 30 per cent on the slabs of dividends over
6 per cent, 10 per cent and 18 per cent, respectively, of capital. For the financial year
1958-59, I propose to fix the excess dividend tax rates for Section 23A companies
only in two slabs, 10 per cent on the slab of dividends over 6 per cent, of capital and
20 per cent on the slab over 10 per cent, of capital. This change is desirable as under
the Act these companies are required to distribute the whole or a large proportion of
their profits to the shareholders. It is not possible to estimate the loss of revenue in
this proposal, but it is likely to be very small.
 61. I also propose to make a change in the substantive income-tax. law in
regard to “Development Rebate”. At present, this rebate is allowed uniformly at 25
per cent of the cost of the new machinery or plant and is available for ships as well.
While this, rate of 25 per cent is adequate for new plant and machinery in general, I
think some further concession is necessary for the shipping industry. I propose, therefore,
to increase the rate of development rebate for ships to 40 per cent Simultaneously, the
conditions for the grant of development rebate will be tightened as some instances of
abuse of this concession have come to notice.
 62. In addition to these, the Finance Bill contains some amendments relating
to income-tax law, some of which are intended to check evasion while some others are
only of a clarificatory nature. To mention the more important of them, the definition
of ‘technician’ is proposed to be made stricter to ensure that the exemption is not
 14

secured to a person who is not legitimately entitled to it. It is also proposed to confer
on the Central Board of Revenue the power to make rules laying down the basis for
valuing perquisites in kind, like rent-free quarters, free use of conveyance, etc., so that
some uniformity is secured in the basis of assessment.
 63. Before leaving the subject of income-tax. I should like to mention a change
in regard to the exemption from tax of payments made to employees for leave passages.
Such exemption is now granted only, if the payments are made under certain rules,
framed by Government. This leads to a large volume of administrative work not
commensurate with the results and these rules are proposed to be withdrawn.
 64. In regard to the Wealth Tax, the only change proposed is to exempt a
foreign citizen from payment of the tax on his foreign wealth, even though he may be
resident or ordinarily resident in India. This was the intention of the Select Committee
when the provisions of the Bill were discussed by them but the intention has not been
secured by the language of the provision as it now stands.
INDIRECT TAXATION
 65. I now turn to the field of indirect taxation. In regard to Union Excise
Duties the only major change I propose is the increase in the rate of duty on Cement
from Rs.20 per ton to Rs.24 per ton. This increase will not, however, raise the issue
price of cement as it is proposed simultaneously to withdraw the surcharge at present
levied by the State Trading Corporation. The additional revenue of Rs.2.24 crores will
be utilised for road development.
 66. Certain minor amendments, mainly of a clarificatory nature, are also being
made and I need not dilate on them here. I should, however, refer to two changes
which are being made immediately by notification. Firstly, for powerlooms producing
cotton textiles it is proposed that the concession of paying duty at compounded rates
should no longer be available to establishments having more than 100 looms.
Simultaneously, the compounded rates applicable to units having 25 to 100 powerlooms
are being suitably enhanced in two stages, This would bring in an additional revenue
of Rs.83 lakhs. Secondly, the rate of duty on vegetable products is being lowered for
the first 3000 tons cleared by each factory. This would give substantial relief to the
smaller producers and will cost the Exchequer Rs.24 lakhs per annum.
 67. Coming to Customs Duties, only a few minor adjustments and verbal
changes are being made in the Tariff Schedule to remove some anomalies or doubts.
The only change of any significance is the introduction of the alternative ad valorem
rate of duty in respect of expensive varieties of artificial silk yarn, like nylon, perlon,
etc., so far as the other yarns, such as viscose, are concerned, the rate of duty is being
left unchanged. The financial effect of these changes will be negligible.


 15

NET EFFECT OF PROPOSALS
 68. The net effect of the taxation proposals may now be summarised. The tax
on gifts will bring in Rs.3 crores, the changes in the Estate Duty Rs.50 lakhs, the
increased duty on cement Rs.2.24 crores and the adjustments in the excise duty on
cloth Rs.83 lakhs, a total sum of Rs.6.57 crores, of which Rs.50 lakhs will accrue to
the States. The reduction in the excise duty on vegetable products will involve a loss
of Rs.24 lakhs leaving the net additional revenue at Rs.5.83 crores. This will leave a
final deficit of Rs.27.02 crores which I propose to leave uncovered.
CONCLUSION
 69. The coming year, which will be the third year of the Plan, is bound to be
one of difficulty calling for a considerable measure of sacrifice on the part of everyone.
It is unnecessary to reiterate that the plan of development the country has set before
itself has to be implemented whatever the sacrifice that may be called for because
without economic development we cannot bring relief and prosperity to the millions
of our countrymen who have suffered for so long from the curse of poverty. The crisis
through which we are passing is a crisis of development,) a crisis of resources. We
must try to produce more, export more and save more to find the resources for
implementing the Plan. In the budget for the coming year we have set ourselves high
targets for both taxation and borrowing. I have no doubt in my mind that these targets
are not beyond our capacity provided there is a sense of discipline and a sense of
urgency in the country. I am sure the effort to realise the resources planned for the
coming year will be forthcoming.
 70. We live in an age of revolutionary changes when the development of
science and technology has opened out vast avenues of human progress. We live also
at a time when a great part of the resources of the world are being directed to
preparations for war and the production of terrible weapons of mass destruction. While
space travel beckons to us and the vast expanses of the universe almost appear to be
in our reach, the horizon of our minds is limited by fear and the shadow of terrible
disaster hangs over us. How can we and others raise ourselves above fear and hatred
and the petty conflicts that are so out of place in the new world that is taking shape?
How can we in India function with courage and unity and grasp with strong hands and
stout hearts at this future? It has been given to us of this generation to face mighty
problems and to achieve great results. We can only serve our own people or the world
if we hold to our ideals and live up to them
 71. This budget statement is a minor event in our march forward. We have to
look at it in the perspective of what we have to do and what we have to achieve,
Above all, we have to realise that our success depends on ourselves and not on others,
on our own strength and wisdom, on our unity and cooperation and on the spirit of our
people whom we are privileged to serve.
 (February 28,1958)

 16

