 PART B
 51. It may assist the House if I explain briefly the various considerations which
I have taken into account in formulating the proposals which I shall place before it. In
dealing with the substantial deficit on both capital and revenue account in the coming
year I have had to keep in mind two requirements. Firstly, additional resources have to
be raised for leaving Government with a sufficient closing balance at the end of the
Budget year. Secondly, the deficit has to be covered to the largest possible extent so as
to avoid the generation of further inflation.
 52. At a time when inflationary conditions exist it must be the aim of
Government to adjust the money supply to the available supply of goods and services
by drawing off as much as possible of the purchasing power in the hands of the
community, either by taxation or by borrowing, the exact proportion between the two
being determined with reference to the prevailing circumstances. In other words,
Government ought to aim at a surplus budget, taking the revenue and capital budget
together. Conversely, at a time of deflation the effect on the community of the fall in the
purchasing power should be mitigated by Government increasing the money supply by
increasing public expenditure. The effect of a budgetary deficit on the economic life of
the country is precisely the same whether it is a deficit on revenue account or a deficit
on capital account. Such a deficit, other things remaining equal, increases the available
money supply in the hands of the community and at a time of inflation adds to the
inflationary spiral. The effect is in no way altered even if the deficit in a particular year
is met from the accumulated balances of the past.
 53. In the light of what I have said just now, I am sure the House will agree
with me that the substantial deficit of Rs.83 crores in the budget next year cannot be left
 17

wholly uncovered. This will reduce the cash balance of Government at the end of the
budget year to Rs.12 crores which will be wholly inadequate, considering the present
magnitude of Government transactions. A safe closing balance for Government should,
in my view, be something of the order of Rs.50 crores. This, in a sense, sets the minimum
limit to the amount of fresh resources that will have to be raised next year to achieve a
satisfactory cash position. Any further addition to our resources will be welcome, if it
could be obtained.
 54. After a careful consideration of the problem in all its aspects I have come
to the conclusion that something like half this deficit should be met by raising additional
resources and the balance met from the accumulated cash balances of Government.
 55. The House may well ask if this deficit could not have been avoided either
by economies or by the postponement of capital expenditure. I have explained at some
length, while dealing with the expenditure estimates, the steps taken to secure economies
in public expenditure. While this quest for economy will be rigorously pursued, it will
be unrealistic to expect that this will release any appreciable amount for financing the
capital budget. The capital budget itself has been so carefully pruned that it now provides
only for essential schemes of capital outlay and development, which cannot be further
curtailed without affecting the country’s development and for the requirements con-
nected with the rehabilitation of displaced persons. Even within the accepted provision
for capital expenditure, which in the case of most spending Ministries and State
Governments represents a very substantial reduction on their demands, it is my intention
to suggest the enforcement of economies in spending by the adoption of austerity
standards in regard to construction, scale of accommodation and so on. While all these
efforts may yield some results, it is unlikely that they will bridge to a substantial extent
the deficit on capital account next year.
 56. This brings me to the important problem of distributing the additional burden
in the coming year between taxation and borrowing. So far as borrowing is concerned,
the House is well aware of the difficult conditions prevailing in the capital market. In
my estimates for the coming year I have taken credit for a total borrowing of a little
over Rs.140 crores, taking small savings and market borrowings together. While I am
satisfied that this is not in any way over-optimistic there is little scope, unless there is a
very marked improvement in the position, for bettering on these estimates. I am, therefore,
left with no alternative but to turn to the tax-payer for helping me out. In doing so I am
not unaware of the present level of the tax burden but in an emergency like this I am
sure that some additional burden will be borne cheerfully in the wider interest of the
country. In laying the tax-payer under further contribution, the House may rest assured
that I have made every effort to see that the additional burdens are spread as widely and
as equitably as possible.
NEW AND ADDITIONAL TAXATION
 57. In the field of direct taxation, my first proposal is to raise the rate of
Corporation tax by a quarter of an anna, from two and a half annas to two and
 18

three-quarter annas. Since 1922 it has always been the practice to fix the rate of Company
super-tax at the lowest rate of super-tax applicable to an individual. This was departed
from twice in recent years, once in the Finance Act of 1946 and again in the Finance Act
of last year. I consider that it is not inappropriate at the present juncture to do something
towards re-establishing the conventional parity between the two rates. This proposal is
estimated to yield an additional revenue of Rs.2.25 crores.
 58. My second proposal is to levy, exclusively for the purposes of the Centre,
a small surcharge of 5 per cent on all income tax and super-tax rates, excluding
Corporation tax with which I have already dealt. The present situation calls for a measure
of sacrifice from every one according to his means and this surcharge will not be an
onerous burden on anyone. On a person with an income of Rs.5,000 a year, this will
mean no more than 8 annas a month. It will amount to Rs.3 a month on a person with an
income of Rs.12,000 a year and Rs.12 a month on a person with an income of Rs.24,000.
I am sure the House will agree that this burden cannot be considered excessive. The
additional revenue from this surcharge which, as I mentioned, will accrue in its entirety
to the Centre is estimated at Rs.6 crores.
 59. Before I leave the subject of income-tax I should like to mention a minor
adjustment that is being made in respect of the rebate of super-tax given to Life insurance
Companies. The income tax investigation Commission have suggested that the rebate
of super-tax hitherto given to Life insurance Companies was not justified in respect of
that portion of the profits of the business which went into the pockets of the shareholders
and did not accrue to the benefit of the policy holders. Government have accepted the
Commission’s recommendation and the rebate is proposed to be reduced from 2 annas
to 11/2 annas. The effect of this on the revenue will be negligible and I have taken no
credit in the budget for this.
 60. Turning to indirect taxes I shall first deal with changes in-the Customs
duties. My first proposal is to levy an enhanced surcharge of 5 per cent on all items in
the import schedule except such of them as are governed by specific agreements under
the General Agreement Relating to Trade and Tariffs. In other words, the proposal is
that for any item for which the existing surcharge is, say, twenty per cent the new rate
should be 25 per cent. Articles at present exempt from surcharge will pay a surcharge of
5 per cent. The yield from this is estimated to be Rs.2 crores.
 61. My next proposal is to increase the Present surcharge of 100 per cent on
ale, beer, spirits, and other fermented liquor by 50 per cent. The yield from this is
estimated at Rs.40 lakhs.
 62. My third proposal is to rationalise the incidence of import duties on mineral
oils other than motor spirit and kerosene. The existing duties on these oils will be raised
alternatively to a maximum of 20 per cent of their value, wherever it is higher. The
additional yield from this is estimated at Rs.60 lakhs.

 19

 63. In the field of export duties I propose to make two changes. I propose to
levy a duty of Rs.80 per ton on ground nut kernel. The price of ground nut kernel has
gone up considerably in recent months on account of the increase in demand and this
duty will be in consonance with the policy of appropriating to the exchequer the large
difference between the external and internal prices. I also propose to revive the export
duty on cotton cloth, which was withdrawn in 1949, but confine it to coarse and medium
cloth only, excluding furnishing fabrics and manufactures like hosiery, apparel, towels,
etc. The cloth covered by this duty is made mostly from Indian cotton and enjoys a
price advantage which would justify the imposition of a moderate export duty, which I
suggest should be 10 per cent ad valorem. The yield from the export duty on ground nut
is estimated at Rs.11/2 crores and that from the export duty on cotton cloth at Rs.21/2
crores. Certain readjustments in the application of concessional assessments to existing
export duties on cotton waste and black pepper will also be made by executive orders,
yielding Rs.1 crore and Rs.75 lakhs respectively.
 64. I now turn to Union Excises. Here my first proposal is to increase the present
excise duties on motor spirit and kerosene by 5 per cent so as to equalise the duties of
Customs and Excise. This change is consequential to the general surcharge of 5 per
cent on import duties which I have mentioned earlier. The additional revenue from this
is estimated at Rs.15 lakhs.
 65. My next proposal is to make certain changes in the excise duties on tobacco.
The rationalisation of tobacco excises has, as the House is aware, been under the
consideration of Government for some time. The existing system of taxing tobacco on
the basis of its intended use has not only been criticised as being contrary to the normal
principle that an article should be taxed according to its specific character but has also
proved cumbersome and difficult, both to the administration and to the trade. A
widespread scheme of departmental restrictions designed to guard against the evasion
of taxation by the diversion, after clearance, of tobacco, capable of multipurpose use,
from a low-rated use to a high-rated use has had to be imposed. These have been difficult
to administer and have also created some amount of justifiable discontent in the trade.
 66. The scheme of rationalisation now proposed has two main features. It makes
the minimum changes necessary in the taxation of tobacco which goes into the
manufacture of cigarettes. In respect of other categories of tobacco, the present basis of
taxation with reference to intended use will be abandoned and the duty will be levied as
a leaf duty at flat rates, separately for flue-cured and for other tobacco. The rationalisation
also provides for the levy of a further duty on certain tobacco manufactures like biris
and snuff. The leaf duty on flue-cured tobacco, except tobacco used in the manufacture
of cigarettes, will in future be Rs.1 per lb. while other tobacco will pay a duty at 8 annas
per lb. Flue-cured tobacco used in the manufacture of cigarettes will continue to pay
duty at the existing rates while other tobacco used for the manufacture of cigarettes will
pay the flat rate of leaf duty of 8 annas. The existing concessions for stalk and tobacco

 20

used for agricultural purposes will continue. The manufacture duty on cigarettes, whether
made out of flue-cured tobacco or other tobacco, will subject to certain minor tariff
alterations due to the imposition of the flat rate of leaf duty, continue as at present.
Pipe-tobacco will pay a rate of Rs.6/8/- per lb. Biris and snug will pay in addition to the
leaf duty of 8 annas, as against 12 annas at present, an additional manufacture duty
averaging 8 annas per lb. on their tobacco content.
 67. I have carefully considered the effect of the proposed changes on the
consuming public. Fluecured tobacco is not generally used for chewing or hooka purposes
and over most of this field the additional burden would amount to only 4 annas a pound
over the present rate of 4 annas a lb. This duty has, no doubt, been doubled but considering
the low per capita consumption of tobacco in this form, the additional burden is likely
to be insignificant. In the case of snuff and biris also, fluecured tobacco is hardly ever
used and the consumer will get the benefit of a reduction of 4 annas per lb. In the
present tax of 12 annas a lb. which he is now paying. This loss of revenue has to be
made up and it is in the context of the need for additional revenue and the desirability of
making every section of consumers contribute their share of additional revenue, that
the small manufacture duty on snuff and biris is justified. The manufacture duty on
snuff will be at 8 annas per lb. For birts a graded manufacture duty will be levied at 9
annas a thousand for biris containing more than three quarters of a lb. of tobacco per
1,000 and 6 annas a 1,000 for biris containing three-quarter of a lb. of tobacco or less.
At the existing rate of taxation an average birl smoker is probably paying a duty of Rs.6
a year. Under the new proposals he would pay about Rs.8 a year. Compared to what the
smoker of even the cheapest variety of cigarettes has to pay, I do not think that this
places an undue burden on him.
 68. I mentioned earlier that the rates of duty on tobacco used for cigarettes will
mostly remain unchanged. But, while we are raising the rates of tax paid by the other
sections of tobacco consumers, it is hardly fair to leave the cigarette consumer untouched.
I therefore propose to levy a small surcharge of a quarter of an anna per 10 cigarettes
the retail price of which is more than 2 annas per ten and half an annas per 10 cigarettes
the retail price of which is more than 51/2 annas per ten.
 69. The total additional revenue from the changes in the tobacco tariff which I
have just mentioned is estimated at Rs.13 crores.
 70. Before I conclude the taxation proposals I may mention a proposal which
has only a limited interest, as it affects only the Delhi State. Hon’ble Members are
aware that the question of levying a sales tax in Delhi has been under consideration for
some time. The neighbouring States of Punjab and Uttar Pradesh have sales taxes and
there have been complaints that the existence of a tax-free zone in Delhi results in a
diversion of trade from these States to Delhi to the detriment of their revenues, without
any corresponding benefit to the Centre. The Centre has been advising the various State
Governments to exploit sales taxes for augmenting their resources and there is no reason

 21

why the Centre should not introduce it in Delhi in the present financial stringency
which has underlined the need for exploring all available means of raising additional
money. Government have accordingly decided to introduce a sales tax in Delhi. This
will be done by applying, with suitable modifications, the law of one of the Part A
States. The tax will be a moderate single point tax. The details are being worked out but
in the meanwhile I have taken a credit of Rs.1 crore on this account for the coming year.
NET RESULTS OF PROPOSALS
 71. I may now summarise the net effect of the proposals which have been placed
before the House. The additional revenue from the changes in income-tax is estimated
at Rs.8.25 crores and that from changes in Customs and Central Excise duties to Rs.8.75
crores and Rs.13.15 crores respectively. The sales tax in Delhi is estimated to yield
Rs.1 crore. The total additional revenue is thus estimated atRs.31.15 crores. This will
convert the revenue deficit of Rs.5.54 crores into a surplus of Rs.25.61 crores and
reduce the overall budget deficit of Rs.52.37 crores. This remaining deficit will be met
from the opening balance of Rs.95.42 crores, leaving a closing balance of Rs.43.05
crores at the end of the year.
CONCLUSION
 72. I have now come to the end of my story. I wish it had been possible for me
to present a budget without imposing the additional burdens I have been compelled to
suggest. But the financial difficulties through which the country is passing make it
imperative that sacrifices should be made to enable Government to meet the heavy
demands on them without impairing the economic health of the country. I know that
there will be some criticism that the entire burden next year has been thrown on the
tax-payer and that in distributing this burden the direct tax-payer has been let off more
lightly than the indirect tax-payer. So far as laying the entire burden on the tax-payer is
concerned. I have already explained how it is not possible to raise additional money by
borrowing over of the amount, for which I have taken credit in the budget. Apart from
the effects of recent political and economic changes on the capital market, we still seem
to be in a state of transition so far as the effect of-the shifts in income, to which I have
already referred, on the capital market is concerned. As regards the second criticism I
would point out that, in a relatively poor country like ours, the scope for raising money
by direct taxation is somewhat limited and a fair amount of the tax burden has necessarily
to be laid on the community by means of indirect taxes. For a population of over 35
crores the number of people who pay income-tax in this country is probably something
like 6 to 7 lakhs. It will not, therefore, be correct to say that the raising of additional
taxation by the enhancement of indirect taxes is inequitable. But in suggesting increases
in indirect taxation I have confined them as far as possible to either luxury or near
luxury items. It is, nevertheless, true that the net of taxation has been cast fairly wide
but I am sure the House will agree with me that in the burden of building up the new
India every section of the community should take its legitimate share.

 22

 73. Before I conclude, I should like to say a few words about a charge that has
frequently been made that by drawing upon the accumulated balances in recent years
Government have added to the inflationary pressure. If it is suggested that Government
have been drawing on these balances and putting the money in circulation inside the
country I think this is wholly wrong. We started with an opening balance of about
Rs.270 crores after the partition and at the end of the current year the balance would
have dropped to Rs.95 crores. Thus, in a period of three and a half years, our balances
would have been run down by Rs.175 crores. But during this period Government’s net
overseas expenditure, mainly on the purchase of foodgrains, stores, equipment etc.,
will amount to a little over Rs.400 crores. Thus, taking Government expenditure by
itself, this running down of thtt balances cannot be said to have generated fresh inflation.
But if the suggestion to that the disinflation trends would have been materially assisted
if Government had raised all the finance they required currently, without drawing on
their balances, my answer to it is that it ignores the realities of the situation While a
Government is, in a sense, the creator of economic conditions by its policies, it is, very
often, also the creature of circumstances beyond its control. No government, much less
a popular government, faced-With the multitudinous problems with which this
Government has been faced by the partition of the country and its aftermath, could have
sat back and refused to incur expenditure necessary for the security of the country, the
relief of displaced persons, the grant of food subsidies to keep prices from rising or the
progress of essential schemes vital to the country’s welfare and development. While
there may be legitimate criticism of some item of expenditure or the other I think it will,
on the whole, be correct to say that the bulk of this money has been spent on useful or
unavoidable items.
 74. Sir, it to, I believe, the usual custom to end the budget speech with a review
of the general financial position of the country but I do not propose to do so. In the
rapidly changing conditions all over the world he will indeed be a rash man who can
hazard a guess as to the future. But I have little doubt myself about the inherent strength
of our financial position and I have every confidence in the ability of our people to
sustain and support the Government in whatever measures may be necessary to maintain
the finances of the country in a sound position. It is in this hope and in this faith that I
have made the substantial demands which this budget makes on the tax-payer. I have
been greatly heartened in this task by a recent communication which I have received
from an ordinary villager, who is neither in business nor in service, which I would
venture to mention to the House. It is from one who at present pays no tax to any
authority, Central, State or local. He says that he has a burning desire to help the
Government of India in some way or the other. He has remitted a sum of five rupees to
me and has promised to remit a similar sum every year. It is not the small amount that he
has offered but the spirit behind the offer that matters and, so long as the common run
of our people can produce men and women with this spirit, this country can face the
future, however difficult it may be, with confidence.
 (FEBRUARY 28, 1951)

 23

