 PART B
 92. In the last year’s Budget I had announced the Government’s intention to
formulate a Long Term Fiscal Policy co-terminus with the Plan. I am glad that the
Government has been able to keep this commitment. The statement of the Government’s
long term fiscal intentions has, I am aware, greatly reduced the speculation and drama
 17

that has traditionally surrounded Budgets. I hope Hon’ble Members will agree that the
loss in dramatic content has been more than compensated by the gain in imparting a
stable frame-work, and much greater opportunity for open debate, in relation to
Government’s fiscal policies.
 93. A primary thrust of this Budget is to implement the various elements of
the Long Term Fiscal Policy. In particular, I shall be proposing a major overhaul of
our system of excise taxation, which will reduce the cascading effect of multi-point
excise levies and help in reducing costs and prices to consumers. The Budget will
strengthen the development of handlooms, improve the supply of cheaper cloth, and
lower duties on drugs and medicines and certain other articles of interest to consumers.
 94. I also propose to liberalise the excise exemptions scheme for small scale
industry, which will encourage growth of this sector and create more employment
opportunities. In order to promote self-reliance and encourage domestic production, I
propose to provide substantial help to domestic production of edible oils and to the
indigenous capital goods industry. Naturally, I shall also be making certain proposals
for raising revenue, the burden of which will fall on the affluent sections of society.
 95. I would be brief in setting out my proposals for direct taxes as these have
been discussed in the Long Term Fiscal Policy. We are introducing legislation to give
effect to the following proposals:-
 (1) A Funding Scheme is being introduced which will replace the scheme for
 Investment Allowance. Assessees will be allowed deduction to the extent
 of 20 per cent of the profsf these are deposited with the Industrial
 Development Bank of India or utilised for purchase of plant and machinery.
 Surcharge on companies which was largely being deposited with Industrial
 Development Bank of India, is being abolished from assessment year 1987-
 88, along with the introduction of the New Funding Scheme.
 (2) Investment Allowance will not be available in respect of plant and
 machinery installed after 31.3.1987. The benefit of both investment
 allowance and the funding scheme will not be available in the same
 assessment year.
 (3) I had earlier proposed in the Long Term Fiscal Policy that, as part of the
 reform package, surtax on corporate incomes will not be charged from
 assessment year 1987-88. In the interest of revenue, I am postponing giving
 effect to this measure by one more year.
 (4) In regard to Capital Gains taxation, the date of determining the cost of
 assets is being advanced from 1.1.64 to 1.4.74, and a uniform rate of
 deduction at the rate of 50 per cent is being prescribed for long term
 capital gains from buildings and lands and 60 per cent from other assets.
 Bonds issued by Industrial Development Bank of India and Bonds issued
 18

 by other notified public sector agencies are also being added to the list of
 investments qualifying for exemptions from Capital gains. The limit for
 initial deduction is being increased from Rs.5,000/- to Rs.10,000/-. The
 present period of one year for purchase of a residential house in a case
 where the capital gains arise on sale of an old house is being increased to
 2 years.
 96. As promised in the Long Term Fiscal Policy Statement, I propose to
introduce a system of allowing depreciation in respect of blocks of assets instead of
the present system of depreciation on individual assets. Simultaneously, I propose to
rationalise the rate structure by reducing the number of rates as also by providing for
depreciation at higher rates so as to ensure that more than 80 per cent of the cost of the
plant and machinery is written off in a period of 4 years or less. This will render
replacement easier and help modernisation. Apart from those items which are eligible
for 100 per cent depreciation in the initial year itself, there are at present different
rates for plant and machinery. I propose to have only two rates of depreciation at 33
1/3 per cent and 50 per cent. Plant and machinery used as anti-pollution devices and
those using indigenous know-how, are proposed to be placed in a block carrying the
higher rate of depreciation of 50 per cent. Buildings meant for low-paid employees of
industrial undertakings will be entitled to depreciation at 20 per cent as against the
general rate of 5 per cent for residential buildings and 10 per cent for non-residential
buildings.
 97. It has been brought home to me that of late I am not very popular with
housewives. Their support and sympathy, I cannot afford to lose. Therefore, I propose
to raise the standard deduction from 25 per cent to 30 per cent of salary income. The
ceiling will be increased from Rs.6,000 to Rs.10,000. The measure will benefit 3.5
lakh tax payers in the fixed income group. I am giving this benefit on the condition
that it will be duly passed on to the housewives.
 98. While the medical needs of some groups of salary earners are taken care
of by the employers, there is no such provision in the case of other salary earners and
of self-employed persons. In order to provide some relief in respect of medical expenses
by such persons, I propose to allow a deduction out of the total income of such
persons, subject to limits, of the amount spent by them on medical treatment or paid
as premium on medical insurance policies taken by them with the General Insurance
Corporation of India.
 99. In line with the Long Term Fiscal Policy another major step being taken
is to empower the Government with a pre-emptive right to purchase properties which
are offered for sale in the market at the price agreed to by the transferer. To begin
with, this provision will apply to properties valued at over Rs.10 lakhs located in
metropolitan cities. An honest seller, wherever he may be, will not be hurt by this
measure. For the rest, it is between them and the Income-Tax Department - and God!
 19

 100. One of the vexatious problems in Wealth Tax has been the determination
of the market value of assets. In order to eliminate the endless controversy and litigation
arising out of this, we have decided to frame simpler rules for the valuation of assets
such as shares, residential properties, commercial properties, jewellery, etc. and these
will be notified by the end of March, 1986.
 101. In the Long Term Fiscal Policy I had announced the intention of the
Government to retain Gift Tax, and review its provisions with a view to rationalising
them. The following amendments are being made in the Gift Tax Act:
 (a) The basic exemption limit will be raised from Rs.5,000/- to Rs.20,000/-.
 (b) Gift tax will be levied at a flat rate of 30 per cent of the value of the
 taxable gifts.
 (c) The provision relating to aggregation of gifts.
 (d) Certain exemptions like those relating to National Defence Gold Bonds,
 1980, gifts to the spouse, gifts of policies of insurance, gifts in the course
 of carrying on a business, etc. and gifts to any other person upto a maximum
 of Rs.500/- are being withdrawn.
 102. There is at present tax deduction at source from out of winnings derived
from races and lotteries. I propose to tax these windfall profits at a flat rate of 40 per
cent of the gross receipts. The exemption from income of a casual and non-recurring
nature will simultaneously be raised from Rs.1,000 to Rs.5,000. Income from any
winnings from crossword puzzles, card games, other games of any sort or from gambling
or betting of any form or nature whatsoever, races including horse races (other than
income earned by owners of race horses by way of stake money) and winnings from
lotteries will not be aggregated with other incomes. That is to say, losses, if any, from
other business will not be allowed to be set off against winnings from races or lotteries.
It has been said that “whoever plays deep must necessarily lose his money or his
character”. In depriving the lucky winner of his money, I hope I would have contributed
to the building of his character.
 103. The above measure along with the withdrawal of certain other tax
concessions in respect of inter-corporate dividends, will net additional revenue of
Rs.54 crores.
 104. It is proposed that part of the benefit of tax deduction on export profits
should be allowed to be transferred to the supporting manufacturers. This will help
increase our exports.
 105. The Long Term Fiscal Policy recognises the need to widen the tax base
and to bring all persons who have income above taxable limit, into the tax net. For this
purpose, it is necessary to carry out surveys. An amendment is being made to authorise
the Income-tax authorities to collect certain information. We are also taking separate
 20

steps to strengthen survey, investigation and prosecution machinery of the Income-tax
Department
 106. In the Long Term Fiscal Policy, I had indicated the outline of a National
Deposit Scheme (New Series) for public discussion. I am grateful for the comments
and suggestions received from the general public, experts and also many Hon’ble
Members of Parliament. Suggestions have been received for liberalising its provisions
as well as for making these more restrictive. In view of the importance of this measure.
I have decided to refer this proposal to the Committee on Expenditure Tax for more
intensive examination. I am asking them to submit their report on this aspect by May,
1986.
 107. The Long Term Fiscal Policy has also proposed the creation of a Venture
Fund to promote indigenous technology, to be administered by the Industrial
Development Bank of India. It was proposed that as a source of funding this scheme,
a small 5 per cent Research and Development levy will be imposed on all payments
made for purchase of technology from abroad, including royalty payments, lump sum
payments and payments for designs and drawings. A separate Bill to give effect to this
levy will be introduced in Parliament.
 108. We also propose to carry out the following amendments:-
 (a) Investment allowance and depreciation is claimed on the basis of actual
 cost. In the past few years a number of companies have been using an
 accounting practice of capitalising the entire amount of interest on the
 monies borrowed for acquiring of plant and machinery. This artificially
 inflates the cost of the assets and the net worth of the company. We are
 clarifying that the capitalisation of interest paid or payable will not be
 allowed after the asset is first put to use.
 (b) The ceiling of investment in plant and machinery for the small scale sector
 is being raised from Rs.20 lakhs to Rs.35 lakhs, as mentioned last year
 and would be applicable to all cases where the previous year ends after
 17th March, 1985. This enhancement will be relevant also for the grant of
 investment allowance and for reduction in respect of profits and gains
 from newly established small scale industrial undertakings in rural areas.
 (c) There is, at present, a great disparity between persons in receipt of house
 rent allowance and those provided with rent free accommodation, the
 former being worse off in the matter of payment of taxes. Amendments
 are being introduced to do away with this discrimination.
 (d) At present notional income from self-occupied house is being taken into
 account for taxes. It is proposed to exempt such notional income.
 21

 (e) I propose to rationalise the tax deductible from the gross amount of incomes
 earned by way of royalties and fees for technical services by foreign
 collaborators at a uniform rate of 30 per cent.
 109. We had initiated a simplification exercise in the last Budget which has
been continued this year. It is proposed to bring out a comprehensive new Direct
Taxes Code by June, 1986.
 110. The total effect of these proposals will be a revenue loss of Rs.33 crores
and a revenue gain of Rs.54 crores. The net increase in revenue will, therefore, be
Rs.21 crores.
 111. I now come to my proposals relating to Indirect Taxes.
 112. An important item in our agenda for 1986-87 is to initiate reform in the
system of indirect taxes. The first step was taken in the Winter Session of the Parliament
when new Tariff Bills for Customs and Excise were introduced based on the harmonized
system of classification. The new structure is scientific and international. In the second
stage, the tariff structure with such amendments of duties, as will be carried out in this
Budget, will replace the old ad hoc structure.
 113. In excise taxation a vexatious question which has been often encountered
is the taxation of inputs and the cascading effect of this on the value of the final
product. The Long Term Fiscal Policy had stated that the best solution would be to
extend the present system of proforma credit to all exciseable commodities with the
exception of a few sectors with special problems like petroleum, tobacco and textiles.
This scheme, which has been referred as Modified Value Added Tax (MODVAT)
scheme - I shall stress MODVAT, not MADVAT - allows the manufacturer to obtain
instant and complete reimbursement of the excise duty paid on the components and
raw materials.
 114. ‘Me MODVAT scheme provides a transparency which discloses the full
taxation on the product and its introduction is an important measure of cost reduction.
Amount of excise duty payable depends upon the value of the final product and the
rate of duty. Introduction of MODVAT will decrease the cost of the final product
considerably through the availability of instant credit of the duties paid on the inputs
and consequential reduction of interest costs.
 115. It would be noticed that the MODVAT scheme avoids the payment of
duties on earlier duties paid. The payment of duty drawback will be swifter as the
element of excise duty will be transparent It will, therefore, benefit both the consumers
and exporters.
 116. However, in view of the novelty of the scheme, we have to hasten slowly
and implement the MODVAT scheme in stages. As a first measure, I propose to
introduce MODVAT scheme for all goods covered by 37 specified chapters of the
 22

Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985. The Scheme as a result would cover products of
chemical and allied industries, paints and packaging materials, plastics, glass and
glassware, rubber products, base metals and articles of base metals, machinery and
mechanical appliances including electrical equipments, motor vehicles and certain
miscellaneous manufactured products. This would imply that as long as the input and
the final product are covered by the specified 37 chapters and the final product bears
some duty of excise, credit of duty on the inputs covered by these chapters will be
available.
 117. The proforma credit given will cover both excise duty and additional duty
of customs also known as countervailing duty. Set off will also be available for
packaging materials, consumables, paints though these are not strictly raw materials.
Items outside these chapters availing proforma credit and benefits of set off under any
erstwhile schemes would be allowed to continue to get the relief to the extent the
revised tariff headings permit. However, the MODVAT scheme and the erstwhile
schemes to the extent they are continued, will be mutually exclusive.
 118. The MODVAT scheme will be in force from 1st March, 1986.
Manufacturers who fulfil the requirement will be able to avail of proforma credit in
respect of the permissible goods which have suffered duty of excise from 1st February,
1986 and are either in the stocks or are received by the manufacturer on or after 1st
March, 1986.
 119. As stated earlier, the introduction of MODVAT scheme will result in
considerable reduction in the cost of final product and, therefore, to retain the collection
of excise duties at the earlier level, the rates of duties on the final product have been
suitably adjusted. After accounting for the set off, the duty rates have been rounded to
the nearest step in the new duty structure. While all care has been taken to work out
the incidence of set off benefits, the scheme being a new one, Central Board of Excise
and Customs would take corrective steps wherever anomalies are noted.
 120. In respect of Small Scale Industry, the objective of reform is to ensure
that the scheme of concessions is a ladder and not a lid. That is to say, such concessions
should facilitate and encourage healthy growth of the small scale units and prevent
unnecessary fragmentation and bifurcation of units. With this end in view, I propose
to introduce a New Scheme of Excise Concessions for small scale units. The proposed
scheme will considerably enhance the scope of concessions available to the small
scale sector. Under the New Scheme, the full exemption will continue to be available
upto clearances of Rs.7.5 lakhs in a year which account for nearly 85 per cent of the
small scale units in the country.
 121. Under the chief existing scheme, excise duty is chargeable in slabs of 25
per cent, 50 per cent or 75 per cent of the duty rate upto a turnover limit of Rs.40
lakhs. After that, full duty is chargeable until turnover reaches Rs.75 lakhs. If a unit
crosses this level it loses the entire exemption. It has been noticed that the present slab
 23

rate system has provided strong temptation for small scale units to stay below a
particular limit or to under-state their, actual production. Under the New Scheme, in
respect of clearances in excess of Rs.7.5 lakhs, the excise concession will be available
at a flat rate of 10 percentage points below normal duty, subject to a minimum excise
duty of 5 per cent. This concession will apply upto a turnover limit of Rs.75 lakhs.
Thereafter the unit will pay normal duty but continue to enjoy the concessional rate
on the first 75 lakhs of turnover. However, this concession will be lost when the Unit
has crossed a turnover of Rs.1.5 crores.
 122. As a transitional measure and to overcome possible handicap in certain
marginal cases, I am proposing that units in the turnover range of Rs.7.5 lakhs to
Rs.15 lakhs may be allowed to pay concessional excise duty either at a rate of 10
percentage points below the excise duty rate or 25 per cent of the excise duty but not
less than 2.5 per cent. The relief corresponding to this turnover range will also continue
to be available to units with higher turnover for the prescribed period of one year.
 123. An important feature of the new scheme is its universal applicability to all
types of exciseable goods with a few exceptions like cosmetics, TV sets, refrigerating
and air-conditioning appliances, etc.
 124. A new and major concession which is being allowed to the small scale
sector relates to grant of proforma credit under the MODVAT scheme. We are providing
that proforma credit would be equal to the notional normal duty even when the small
scale unit would have paid only concessional duty.
 125. The introduction of this new SSI scheme from 1st March, 1986 will mean
a revenue loss of Rs.75 crores.
 126. In the last year’s Budget Special Excise Duty had been removed from as
many as 100 items from the Excise Tariff. I now propose to remove the Special Excise
Duty on the remaining 32 items of the old Tariff.
 127. My next set of proposals relate to incentives for greater production of
edible oils. It is well known that the potential of production of oils from rice bran, oil
cakes, cotton seeds, tree oil seeds is not fully exploited. A big thrust to maximise
extraction of such oils, especially edible oils from these sources is proposed to be
accomplished by the following measures:-
 (1) If minor oils like rice bran oil, mahuwa oil, water melon seed oil, sal seed
 oil and mango kernel oil are used by the Vanaspati units in excess of 3 per
 cent in the total oil mix, an excise duty relief of Rs.100 per metric tonne
 on Vanaspati will be given for each additional percentage point of use of
 such minor oils.
 (2) In case cotton seed oil is used in excess of 15 per cent in the total oil mix
 for Vanaspati production, a relief of excise duty to the extent of Rs.30/-
 24

 per metric tonne of Vanaspati for each additional percentage point of use
 will be given. The maximum relief for the use of minor oils and cotton
 seed oil together will not exceed Rs.1000 per metric tonne.
 (3) The extent of relief in case of use in soap is being increased to Rs.25/- per
 metric tonne for each additional percentage point of minor oils in excess
 of 3 per cent of such oils in the total oil mix. The relief now will be
 available for 10 additional minor oils apart from the 4 minor oils which
 enjoy the concession today at a lower rate.
 (4) The excise duty on solvents is being brought to Nil from the existing
 Rs.1050/- per kilo litre.
 (5) Hardened inedible technical oils, fatty acids, soap-stocks and acid oils are
 being exempted from excise duty. This measure is expected to reduce
 imports and encourage the greater use of minor technical oils.
 (6) Plant and machinery as may be identified by the Department of Civil
 Supplies for improving the quality and increasing the production of solvent
 extracted oils or oilmeals will be exempted from customs duty or excise
 duty, as the case may be.
 (7) It is proposed to provide a cash compensatory support of 10 per cent of
 the f.o.b. value of oil meal exports.
 128. The poorer sections of our society consume unrefined vegetable oils made
from crushing of domestic oilseeds and it is proper that such oils continue excise duty
free. We do not allow the use of crushed groundnut oil or mustard oil in vanaspati so
that it remains available for direct consumption by the weaker consumers. There is,
however, a production of less than 5 lakh tonnes of refined edible oils which is
consumed by the affluent classes. In general, the prices of these refined oils are even
higher than those of vanaspati and the commercial margins are high. I propose to levy
an excise duty of Rs.1500 per tonne on costly refined edible oils in line with the
excise duty on vanaspati. However, to encourage the production of new refined minor
oils, we propose to exempt from this levy refined oils from soyabean, rice bran, cotton
seed and sunflower.
 129. The total revenue gain on account of the excise duty on a few refined
vegetable oils will be Rs.80 crores in a year; while the total revenue loss as a result of
the above described measures would be Rs.82.20 crores. These proposals would,
therefore, be revenue negative to the extent of Rs.2.20 crores.
 130. I have to announce the following measures which will help exports and
export production:-
 (1) Export duty on unmanufactured tobacco has lost its rationale. In order to
 provide a competitive edge to the unmanufactured tobacco in the
 25

 international market and to ensure that the tobacco farmers are able to get
 a fair price, I propose to provide total exemption from export duty on this
 item.
 (2) Garment industry is poised for rapid development and exports and we
 have recently conceded to them drawback rate of 7.5 per cent. In view of
 the potential of this industry for exports and employment, it I proposed to
 further improve the general drawback rate to 10 per cent.
 (3) It has been a long standing demand of the footwear industry that the
 scheme of excise concession to small scale units of footwear production
 presently granted to units with 2 HP and 49 workers should be reviewed.’
 units in case of footwear are the backbone of the production structure. It
 is now proposed to extend the scheme of exemption to small scale industries
 to the footwear sector also. In view of the shortage in the availability of
 wattle bark to our industry, the import duty has been reduced from 70 per
 cent to 40 per valorem. The import duty on leather-shaving blades is
 being reduced from an average rate of 72.5 per, 40 per cent.
 (4) Improvement in marine products export earnings will come about by
 modernisation of the plants to improve quality of product and also by
 moving over to added value product. It is, therefore, proposed to reduce
 duty on specified machines used in processing and packaging of marine
 products from existing rate of cent to 40 per cent (Basic and Auxiliary).
 (5) We have a potential for development of exports of cigar, cheroots and
 cigarilloes. This would require development of production of branded
 products which will sell both in the domestic and in the export n is proposed
 to do away with the excise duty presently levied on branded cigars, cheroots
 and cigarillos. Excise duty on branded Hukka tobacco is also being
 abolished. I may confess that total excise collections on these items were
 insignificant. Those who cannot afford to smoke cigarettes can now turn
 to cigars and cheroots.
 (6) Gem and Jewellery - A reduction of import duty in respect of 74 items of
 machines, equipment and too being made from the existing level of 40
 per cent to 228 per cent ad valorem to 25 per cent. Arrangements are also
 being made to allow export of gem and jewellery through air mail and
 parcel post from Bombay and Jaipur.
 131. The concessions given in the interest of exports will cost the exchequer
Rs.12.94 crores on the custom and Rs.9 lakhs on the excise side.
 132. In the textile sector, considerable relief has already been provided in August,
1985 as part of the implementation of the first stage of Textile Policy. From a review
made by the Department of Textiles, it is observed that the market prices of fibre,
 26

blended yarn and fabrics showed a declining trend upto November, 1985, though
increase was noticed in December, 1985 and January, 1986. On the production side,
there has been an increase: production of blended yarn from 129.72 million kilogrammes
during July-December, 1994 to 146.72 million kilogrammes during July-December,
1985. It may, however, take some time to realise the full benefits of the duty reliefs.
Under the ‘Sulabh’ cloth scheme, National Textiles Corporation has been provided
with duty free polyester and production of such cheap blended fabrics would go up to
50 million metres in 1986-87.
 133. The Textile Policy also aims at encouraging production of blended fabrics
on handlooms. Government considering a scheme whereby specified handloom
organisations can be provided blended yarn made from duty polyester fibre. For the
present, I propose to fully exempt blended polyester cotton and polyester viscose yarn
w certain polyester content supplied to specified handloom organisations. Duty is also
being fully waived on processing of specified blended fabrics by specified handloom
development organisations.
 134. Handloom cess, which is now being collected at the rate of 1.9 paise per
square metre is utilised for development of handlooms. I propose to raise the cess to
2.5 paise per square metre. The revenue gain of Rs.3., from this measure will be
utilised for setting up an Enforcement Machinery to ensure that the items reserved for
handloom sector are not encroached upon by other sectors of the textile industry.
 135. I propose to extend exemption from excise duty to cover all shoddy woollen
products. These will include blankets, melton cloth, shoddy shawls and other fabrics.
 136. As a measure of relief to the woollen industry, I propose to reduce the
import duty on raw wool from 4C cent to 20 per cent ad valorem. To make up this loss
and also to avoid assessment disputes, I propose to increase import duty on wool
waste and woollen rags from 10 per cent to 20 per cent.
 137. As Hon’ble Members are aware, a reduced rate of customs duty of 25 per
cent ad valorem was provided respect of a few sophisticated textile machines in the
year 1983. I propose to continue those reliefs for one more Moreover, in order to
encourage domestic production of certain sophisticated textile machines, I propose to
provide reduced rate of customs duty of 25 per cent ad valorem in respect of components
of such machines. This will involve a loss of Rs.2.74 crores in a year.
 138. To protect jute bag industry, I propose to levy duty on synthetic tapes at
the rate of Rs.10 per kilogramme where input duty relief will be available; on other
tapes the duty will be Rs.4 per kilogramme. This will also result revenue gain of Rs.15
crores in a full year.
 139. Our review of the earlier reliefs given during 1985 have shown that while
reliefs were passed on by the fibre manufacturers, the blended yarn producers did not
 27

do so after an initial period of decline in prices. The prices of blended yarn produced
by many of the important companies has gone up to or near the level prior to the grant
of excise relief. I think it is necessary to establish the principle that if the spirit of
reliefs given in the interest of consumers is not respected, the Government will withdraw
the reliefs. I am reducing the reliefs given to the yarn producers roughly by about 50
per cent. On their future conduct will depend our further response.
 140. The Government is also committed to increasing the share of additional
duty (in lieu of sales tax). I propose to raise the additional duty of excise on cotton and
man-made fabrics of value, exceeding Rs.50 per square metre by Rs.2.50 per square
metre. This will yield a revenue of Rs.18 crores for the States.
 141. The above proposals will lead to a gain of Rs.55.83 crores in excise duty
and a loss of Rs.2.74 crores in the customs duties.
 142. We have received a number of representations from associations of
industries and from the concerned Ministries pointing out the need of certain
rationalisation which are unimportant from the revenue angle but would remove
difficulties for the industry or will bring down the leakage of revenue.
 143. Paper industry has been representing that the scheme of relief to the paper
units using at least 50 per cent unconventional raw materials does not encourage the
mills to increase production. In the new scheme which I am proposing all paper mills
whose clearances did not exceed 24,000 tonnes in the previous financial year and
which do not have a bamboo or wood pulp plant will pay duty at the rate of Rs.300,
Rs.650, Rs.1200 and Rs.1500 per metric tonne for the successive slabs respectively.
For paper mills with clearances exceeding 24,000 metric tonnes or larger paper mills
having bamboo or wood pulp plant, the rate of duty will be 10 per cent ad valorem,
plus Rs.850/- per metric tonne. Finer varieties of paper are being excluded from these
reduced rates. These schemes will be in force from Ist April, 1986 and will cost the
exchequer Rs.6 crores in a year.
 144. It is proposed to have a single uniform rate of excise duty of 30 per cent
ad valorem in respect of 3 major thermo plastics, namely, Low Density Poly-ethylene,
High Density Poly-ethylene and Poly-propylene. The loss in excise duty would be
Rs.7.24 crores. We are, however, revising the customs duty suitably to make the step
revenue neutral. There will be a revenue gain of Rs.7.52 crores in customs duties.
Engineering plastics are raw materials which will have an increasing use in India. It is
proposed to have a concessional rate of 60 per cent ad valorem of customs duty (Basic
plus Auxiliary) in respect of 4 such specified engineering plastics. The additional duty
of customs as appropriate will, however, continue to be levied. It is also proposed to
provide for uniform rate of excise duty of 35 per cent ad valorem in respect of plates,
sheets, films and foils of plastic materials and these items are being brought under the
general scheme of small scale exemptions.
 28

 145. In consonance with the Drug Policy, I propose to exempt 23 specified
Drug intermediates from the levy of additional duty of customs, thereby reducing the
total customs duty on these to 110 per cent ad valorem. Revenue sacrifice will be Rs.1
crore.
 146. I also propose to exempt additional 41 life saving formulations from excise
duty. This will cost the exchequer Rs.15 crores.
 147. The total customs duty on additional five medical equipments of
consumable nature is being abolished. In the last Budget exemptions from customs
duty in excess of 45 per cent was provided in respect of 10 specified items of
sophisticated medical equipments. I propose to enlarge this list substantially by adding
101 items of medical equipments and exempt them from duty in excess of 40 per cent
ad valorem.
 148. In order to encourage domestic production of medical equipments, I also
propose to allow a concessional rate of customs duty of 40 per cent ad valorem in
respect of components for manufacture of 15 identified medical equipments.
 149. In the 1985 Budget, we had given a total exemption from customs duty in
respect of consumable goods imported for scientific research by public funded research
institutions upto the value of Rs.50,000/-. As a measure to encourage indigenous
research and development effort, I propose to remove the ceiling. The revenue sacrifice
would be Rs.5 crores.
 150. These measures will involve a loss of Rs.28.24 crores in excise duties and
Rs.0.48 crore in customs duties.
 151. Some of the Other Rationalisations proposed are the following:-
 (a) I wish to give relief to some items of daily use of the common man. We
 are abolishing excise duty on stoves using kerosene and wood. The value
 limit of complete excise exemption in case of footwear is being raised
 from Rs.30 per pair to Rs.45 per pair. Excise duty is also being abolished
 on brushes, combs, umbrellas, chalks and similar other materials.
 (b) The Long Term Fiscal Policy recognises that cesses levied as excise duties
 contribute to the multiplicity of taxes. As an endeavour to reduce the
 number of these cesses, it has been decided to dispense with the cess on
 cotton, copra and vegetable oils. The Ministry of Agriculture will take
 appropriate action in the matter. The loss to the exchequer on this account
 will be Rs.5.90 crores.
 (c) Ship breaking industry is an important source of scrap for our steel industry.
 It is proposed to fix an effective rate of customs duty on ships imported for
 breaking up at Rs.1,400/- per LDT and to exempt them from the auxiliary
 29

 and additional duties of customs. ‘Me effective rate of excise duty of Rs.365
 per metric tonne would be available for materials obtained by breaking up
 of ships which have suffered the customs duty of Rs.1,400/- per LDT.
 (d) In recognition of the vital role of newspapers, I am reducing import duty
 on 4 items of printing equipment. It is my hope that they will not accuse
 me of influencing the Press.
 152. Some of the other amendments which are being made are the following:-
 (i) The effective rate of basic customs duty on caustic soda is being fixed at
 Rs.3,500/- per metric tonne, and we are exempting it from auxiliary and
 additional duties of customs.
 (ii) Import duty in respect of Synthetic Organic Dye stuffs and certain other
 Dyes is being increased as a measure of protection, from 100 per cent to
 150 per cent ad valorem.
 (iii) The effective rate of basic customs duty on PVC resin in being fixed at
 Rs.10,500/- per metric tonne.
 (iv) We wish to encourage the production of iodised salt in the interest of
 implementation of the National Goitre Control Programme and, therefore,
 iodine imported for the production of iodised salt would receive the
 concessional rate of import duty of 25 per cent ad valorem.
 (v) Specific rates of excise duty are being introduced for manual typewriters
 and leather cloth.
 (vi) The excise duty on marine plywood and aircraft plywood as an anti-
 avoidance measure is being increased from 10 per cent to 20 per cent ad
 valorem. Effective rates of excise duty for match boxes containing 300
 sticks per box are being provided.
 (vii) Exemption from excise duty is also being provided in respect of ores, slag
 and ash, wood pulp, inorganic chemicals used in manufacture of fertilizers,
 clinkers used in the manufacture of cement.
 153. These measures will involve a revenue gain of Rs.26.97 crores on the
customs side and a loss of Rs.3.44 crores on the excise side.
 154. I will now come to important measures of resource mobilisation. My first
proposal is to rationalise the structure of auxiliary duties of customs. At present, there
are 11 slabs of auxiliary customs duties. While the specific duty on crude petroleum
will remain as at present, it is proposed to reduce the existing 11 slabs into three slabs,
namely, Nil, 25 per cent and 40 per cent. This will give us a revenue gain of Rs.190
crores. However, removal of auxiliary duty from certain GATT bound items would
mean a loss of Rs.9 crores.
 30

 155. Earlier in my speech, I had referred to the importance of providing adequate
support to our capital goods industry which is pivotal for self reliance. With this end
in view, it is proposed to increase the general machinery rate of basic customs duty by
10 per cent. A similar increase is also being made in the general project rate from 45
per cent to 55 per dent ad valorem.
 156. As a complement to this, it is proposed to reduce the import duty on
components of capital goods by 5 per cent. This will ensure that the import duty on
components will now stand at 15 per cent below the import duty on the complete
machines. This differential, as recommended in the Long Term Fiscal Policy, would
go towards greater production of capital machines including computerised numerically
controlled machine tools in India instead of their total imports. While the reduction in
rate on components will lead to a revenue loss of Rs.50 crores, the increase in machinery
rate will give Rs.124 crores and the revision of general project rate Rs.120 crores.
 157. In respect of 32 machine tools where domestic production has been
established, the customs duty is being raised to 110 per cent. Again, 91 machine tools
and instruments have been identified where there is negligible domestic production
and it is proposed to reduce import duty on these machines to 35 per cent ad valorern
(basic plus auxiliary). There will be a revenue sacrifice of Rs.9 crores in customs
duties.
 158. At present there is a concessional rate of duty on the fuel efficient cars
which comes to about 15 per cent ad valorem or less. As I have mentioned earlier, full
MODYAT will be extended to the automobile industry and the new MODVAT rates
for fuel efficient cars would be 20 per cent ad valorem. I feel that such cars and their
purchasers can bear an increase in the rate of duty by 5 per cent.
 159. The current rate of duty for non-fuel efficient cars is around 25 per cent.
The MODVAT rate of such cars would be 30 per cent. It is proposed to increase the
excise duty on non-fuel efficient cars also by 5 per cent so that the final duty would
be 35 per cent. A concession of excise duty was given for non-fuel efficient cars used
as taxis. It is proposed to fix this rate at 30 per cent.
 160. Under the new Excise Tariff, both the chassis of the vehicles and the body
building of the motor vehicles are chargeable to excise duty. Fun MODVAT is available
for the chassis to the body builders in the final vehicle. Body building imparts an
added value to the chassis and it is proposed to levy excise duty of 20 per cent on the
final vehicle also.
 161. The net gain of the revenue of the above proposals would be Rs.40 crores.
 162. The duty incidence on T.V. set has been rather low. Substantial concessions
in customs and excise duties have been given in the past in respect of raw materials
and components for the electronics industry in general. Duty is proposed to be enhanced
 31

from Rs.900 to Rs.1,500 per set in respect of colour TV sets of screen size exceeding
36 cms. Ibis proposal will lead to a revenue gain of Rs.48 crores in a year.
 163. I also propose to provide for levy of additional duty of customs on TV
sets imported as baggage. This increase would restrict the import of TV sets in baggage
to some extent. The gain in revenue in the customs dudes will be Rs.30 crores in a
year.
 164. I propose to increase the duty on air-conditioners and replace the existing
duty by a specific duty to stop evasion. It is proposed to levy a specific rate of duty of
Rs.8000 per air-conditioner upto 1.5 tonne capacity. ‘me rate would be Rs.10,000 per
air-conditioner above 1.5 tonnes and upto 3 tonnes capacity and Rs.15,000 per air-
conditioner thereafter upto a capacity of 7.5 tonnes. A uniform duty of 60% ad valorern
will now be levied on all parts and accessories of refrigerating and airconditioning
machinery. The duty on compressors for airconditioners would be specific at Rs.4000
per compressor. As we are extending full MODVAT relief to the industry, I propose to
dispense with all end-use exemptions except for Government hospitals. The special
scheme of relief to small scale units in this sector will continue. This measure will
yield revenue of Rs.25 crores.
 165. Copies of notifications giving effect to the changes in customs and excise
duties effective from the Ist March, 1986, will be laid on the Table of the House in
due course.
 166. Apart from the above proposals, I have proposed some amendments in the
Finance Bill seeking to effect some changes in the new Customs and Excise Tariffs.
These changes are based on the feedback we have had from the trade and industry as
well as the field formations since the enactment of these two tariffs and generally seek
to preserve the position that existed under the old tariffs.
 167. My proposals in respect of Customs and Excise duties outlined above are
likely to yield additional revenue of Rs.499.92 crores from customs duties and Rs.253.78
crores from excise duties. The concessions and reliefs aggregate Rs.93.11 crores on
the customs side and Rs.193.37 crores on the excise duty. The net additional revenue
from customs duties thus would be Rs.406.81 crores and that from excise duties
Rs.60.41 crores. In the excise dudes, the Centre’s share would be Rs.24.19 crores and
that of States Rs.36.22 crores. In the total net additional yield of Rs.467.22 crores
Centre’s share would be Rs.431.00 crores and that of the States Rs.36.22 crores.
 168. I had earlier mentioned that the Budget deficit at the existing rates of
taxes would be Rs.4095 crores. The proposed tax measures, taken together with reliefs,
are estimated to yield net additional revenue of Rs.445 crores to the Centre. This will
leave an uncovered deficit of Rs.3650 crores. In relation to the size of our economy
and the stock of money, the deficit is reasonable and non-inflationary. It is also
significantly lower than last year.
 32

 169. With this, Mr. Speaker I have come to the end of my task. My principal
priorities in this Budget were to strengthen the public sector, to provide a further
thrust to the anti-poverty programmes, to promote self-reliance, and to provide relief
to the common man. I have provided an increase in the Plan by 20.5 per cent despite
resource constraints. We will be financing over 40 per cent of the Seventh Plan in the
first two years in real terms, which is an achievement in itself. I have increased outlays
for major anti-poverty programmes by nearly 65 per cent in keeping with our socialist
goals. New schemes are being introduced for the benefit of rickshaw pullers, cobblers,
sweepers, porters and others among the urban disadvantaged groups. Interest rates on
Provident Fund contributions is being increased for the benefit of workers and the
self-employed. I have provided tax relief to the fixed income groups. And I have given
incentives for import substitution and export promotion, besides introducing several
measures for rationalisation.
 170. This Budget is just one step forward. Finally, in the immortal words of
Mahatma Gandhi:
 “In times to come the people will not judge us by the creed we profess, or
 the label we wear, or the slogans we shout but by our work, industry,
 sacrifice ........”
 I commend this Budget to the House.
 [28th February, 1986]




 33

