 PART B
 DIRECT TAXES
 36. I come first to the proposals in the field of direct taxes. As Honourable
Members are aware, the Direct Taxes Enquiry Committee has made a number of
recommendations in regard to direct taxes. Several of these recommendations have
already been implemented. Provisions to give effect to some other recommendations
are included in the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1973 which is at present before
 8

a Select Committee of this House. One of the important recommendations of the
Committee relates to reduction in the rates of taxes. The Committee has expressed the
view that prevalence of high rates is the first and foremost reason for tax evasion,
because this is what makes the evasion, in spite of attendant risks, profitable and
attractive. The Committee has, accordingly, recommended that the maximum marginal
rate of income-tax, including surcharge, should be brought down from its present
level of 97.75 per cent to 75 per cent. Simultaneously, there should be a reduction in
tax rates at the middle and lower levels. This recommendation of the Committee has
been accepted by Government with minor modifications. I, accordingly propose to
lower taxes at all levels of personal incomes. Under the proposed rate schedules, no
income-tax will be payable by individuals or Hindu undivided families having income
not exceeding Rs.6,000. The marginal rate of basic income-tax will stand at 70 per
cent on the income in the slab over Rs.70,000. In the case of Hindu undivided families
having at least one member with an independent total income exceeding the minimum
exemption limit, the marginal rate of 70 per cent will be attracted at income levels
over Rs.50,000. The rate of surcharge will be reduced to a uniform level of 10 per cent
in the case of all categories of non-corporate taxpayers. The combined incidence of
income-tax and surcharge, in the case of individuals and Hindu undivided families,
will stand at 77 per cent of the taxable income in the highest slab.
 37. In view of the reduction in taxes on personal incomes, I do not think it is
necessary to continue the preferential tax treatment in respect of incomes derived by
non-corporate taxpayers through providing technical ‘know-how’ and technical services
to Indian or foreign enterprises. I, accordingly, propose to withdraw the existing
concession in this regard.
 38. In order to ensure that the effectiveness of the fiscal instrument for reducing
disparities in incomes and wealth is not impaired, I propose to increase the rates of
wealth-tax on the slabs of net wealth over R8.5,00,000 in the case of individuals and
Hindu undivided families, where no member has net wealth exceeding Rs.1,00,000.
The rate of wealth-tax on the slab of Rs.5,00,001 to Rs.10,00,000 will be increased
from 2 per cent to 3 per cent, and on the slab of Rs.10,00,001 to Rs.15,00,000 from 3
per cent to 4 per cent. In the case of Hindu undivided families having at least one
member with net wealth exceeding Rs.1,00,000, the rate of wealth-tax on the first slab
of Rs.5,00,000 will be raised from 2 per cent to 3 per cent and on the slab of Rs.5,00,001
to Rs.10,00,000 from 3 per cent to 4 per cent.
 39. I also propose to rationalise some of the exemptions available at present
under the Wealth tax Act. I propose to withdraw the separate exemption in respect of
farm houses. Tax payers will, however, have the option to claim exemption in respect
of one farm house, or one other house property within the existing limit of Rs.1, 00,
000. Exemption in respect of agricultural land will be linked with the exemption in
respect of specified financial assets, so that the total exemption in respect of agricultural
land and specified financial assets will be limited to Rs.1,50,000. At present, the value
 9

of the taxpayer’s interest in insurance policies before their maturity is completely
exempt from wealth-tax. A similar exemption is also available in respect of the
taxpayer’s right in any annuity which is not commutable into a lump sum grant. These
exemptions have been exploited by certain individuals by taking out single premium
policies of very large amounts. I propose to modify these provisions so that complete
exemption will be available in respect of insurance monies only where premia have
been paid over a period of 10 years or more. As regards annuities, I propose to withdraw
the exemption in respect of non-commutable annuities if such annuities have been
purchased by the taxpayer himself, or by any other person in pursuance of a contract
with him.
 40. The changes in the Wealth-tax Act will yield about Rs.9.5 crores in a full
year, which will accrue in the financial year 1975-76. The reduction in the rates of
income-tax on personal incomes would ordinarily have resulted in a loss of about
Rs.60 crores in a full year and Rs.36 crores in the financial year 1974-75. I am,
however, not taking any loss into account for budgetary purposes as I expect that the
reduction in the rates of taxes will lead to better tax compliance, and full disclosures
of incomes by all taxpayers.
 41. In the case of registered firms, two surcharges are presently levied. I
propose to merge the ordinary surcharge payable by such firms with the basic income-
tax, and specify only one surcharge at the uniform rate of 10 per cent. In order to
retain the liability in respect of basic income tax in the case of professional firms as
well as other firms at more or less the existing levels, I propose to prescribe two
separate rate schedules in the case of such firms.
 42. In my budget speech for 1971-72, I gave notice of Government’s intention
to withdraw the development rebate in respect of ships acquired or machinery and
plant installed after May 31, 1974. It now appears that industry has in some cases not
been able to secure timely delivery of plant and machinery both from foreign and
indigenous manufacturers which has caused a setback to the timely completion of
some of the industrial projects which would in the normal course have been completed
before May 31, 1974. Several unforeseen factors are responsible for this, such as
uncertainty prevailing in the international market, dependence of indigenous
manufacturers on imports in respect of critical parts or raw materials, difficulties in
the availability of shipping space, power shortage, etc. Relief is deserved in such
cases, and I propose to extend the operation of the development rebate by one year in
cases where there is conclusive evidence to show that contracts for purchase of
machinery and plant were finalized before December 1, 1973. This extension will also
be available in respect of ships acquired up to May 31, 1975, if the contracts for
purchase were made before December 1, 1973.
 43. The critical shortage of petroleum products has resulted in an unexpected
crisis as a result of which industry has to be encouraged to switch over to other
sources of energy. I, accordingly, propose to allow development rebate in respect of
 10

coal-fired boilers or any machinery or plant for converting oil-fired boilers to coal-
fired boilers where these are installed before June 1, 1975.
 44. In order to simplify the assessment procedure in the case of salaried
taxpayers, I propose to substitute the separate deductions in respect of traveling,
books, taxes on professions and expenditure incurred in the performance of duties
by a standard deduction up to a maximum of Rs.3, 500. Simultaneously I propose to
place the valuation of perquisites of employees on a more realistic basis, I also
propose to liberalise the tax treatment of retirement benefits in certain directions.
The retiring gratuities payable under the Payment of Gratuities Act, 1972 will be
completely exempt from income-tax. In the case of employees not covered by that
Act, the alternative ceiling limits on the exempted amount of gratuities will be
raised from Rs.24, 000 to Rs.30, 000 and from 15 months’ salary to 20 months’
salary.
 45. In order to enable State Financial Corporations to build up reserves at an
accelerated pace, I propose to raise the ceiling limit in respect of amounts transferred
to tax exempt reserves to 40 per cent of the current profits.
 46. There are a large number of public charitable trusts and -registered societies
engaged in the development of khadi and village industries. These trusts and societies
are doing commendable work under the direct supervision of the Khadi and Village
Industries Commission. I propose to exempt all such Institutions from income-tax
provided they are approved by the Khadi and Village Industries Commission.
 47. As a result of the change in pricing policies, some of the industrial
companies are making windfall profits. I feel that the exchequer should also secure a
larger share of these profits. I, accordingly, propose to increase the rate of surtax from
30 per cent to 40 per cent in respect of chargeable profits of companies exceeding 15
per cent of the capital. This measure will yield Rs.5 crores in a full year and this will
accrue in 1975-76.
 48. To sum up, in the field of direct taxes no effect is expected on tax revenues
during the next financial year as a result of the proposals outlined by me. In the
financial year 1975-76, there will be an addition of Rs.14.5 crores as a result of these
changes.
INDIRECT TAXES
 49. Sir, I will now move on to the proposals relating to indirect taxes.
 50. As in the past, I have necessarily to rely more heavily on indirect taxes,
particularly excise duties. The scope for raising resources from other measures having
become severely limited, the choice before me has really been between raising indirect
taxes and resorting to deficit financing and the former, I feel, is the better alternative.

 11

EXCISE DUTIES
 51. Taking up Central Excises, I shall first deal with some important measures
for raising resources exclusively for the Centre. Honourable Members are aware that
a new provision was made last year for levying auxiliary duties of excise on all
excisable goods at an amount equal to 20 per cent of the value of the goods. These
levies were restricted to certain selected items at a level needed to meet the demands
of the Centre then. I propose to continue this provision for another year. While the
effective levies on the items chosen last year will remain unchanged, I propose to add
selectively some more to the list.
 52. Briefly, my proposal is to levy auxiliary duties at the rate of ten per cent
of the effective basic duty on un-manufactured tobacco, cigarettes, smoking mixtures,
plywood and cement; at the rate of twenty per cent of the effective basic duty on
dyestuffs, optical bleaching agents, gases, rubber products and plastics; at the rate of
thirty-three and one-third per cent of the effective basic duty on paints and varnishes;
and at the rate of fifty per cent of the effective basic duty on aerated waters, glycerine,
cosmetics and toilet preparations. Through these proposals and as a result of the
modifications of the basic excise duties I am proposing on the existing items, I expect
to raise Rs.62.38 crores in a year, by way of auxiliary duties.
 53. In the case of steel as well as other metals, the auxiliary duties are proposed
to be applied only to indigenous production and will not be attracted by way of
countervailing duty on imports, as hithereto. I propose to extend a similar exemption
in the case of plastics.
 54. In the sphere of basic excise duties, my proposals naturally cover a wider
range and have been made with the multiple objects of rationalisation, curbing
consumption, mopping up fortuitous gains and, not the least important, I must confess,
raising revenue. In November, 1973, following successive increases in crude oil prices
and cuts in crude oil supplies, and as one of a series of measures, the basic excise duty
on motor spirit was raised from Rs.1000 per kilolitre to Rs.2000 per kilolitre. In view
of the continuing need for exercising restraint and economy in the consumption of a
number of other petroleum products, and to prevent their misuse, I propose to increase
substantially the basic excise duties in respect of “special boiling point” spirits, raw
naphtha intended for methanol and petro-chemicals, benzene etc. used for a variety of
purposes, asphalt and bitumen, mineral turpentine oil, waxes and blended or
compounded lubricating oils and greases. Through these proposals, I expect to raise
an additional revenue of Rs.22.48 crores from the petroleum group.
 55. The rates of excise duty on various types of motor vehicles have remained
unchanged for some years now. I, therefore, propose to rationalise the rates of duty
by replacing the existing alternative rates by ad valorem rates. I intend imposing a
uniform rate of 9 per cent ad valorem on vehicles like scooters, motor-cycles, mopeds,
auto-rickshaws and other three-wheelers. Motor vehicles of not more than 16 H.P.

 12

by R.A.C. rating, which cover passenger-cars, jeeps, etc., are at present assessable
at a rate of duty of 13.33% ad valorem. I propose to increase this rate to 20% ad
valorem in respect of vehicles with body and to 25% ad valorem in respect of
others, including those cleared as drive-away chassis. Big-sized cars will pay a
higher duty at 40% ad valorem.
 56. Commercial Vehicles have had the benefit of concessional ‘specific’ rates
fixed some years ago. I propose to discontinue these and impose a uniform ad valorem
rate of 121/2 per cent. In that process, certain extra-heavy vehicles, which are at present
paying duty at the tariff rate, will get an incidental benefit of 21/2 per cent. I do not,
however, propose to change the existing rates on tractors and trailers.
 57. The proposals relating to motor vehicles are estimated to net an additional
revenue of Rs.16.25 crores.
 58. As part of the socio-economic objectives of the Government, I have some
proposals to restrain consumption by the more affluent section of the community. The
existing rates of duty on refrigerators, air-conditioners, refrigerating and air-conditioning
machinery, appliances, and parts, are being stepped up, with certain modifications in
respect of a few existing exemptions. The present concessional rates in favour of
public-run hospitals, cold-storage plants and factory establishments are not, however,
being disturbed. These changes are expected to bring in additional revenue of Re.5
crores in a year.
 59. Some of the manufacturers of T.V. sets have been regaling us with
advertisements exhorting the public to “budget for a T.V. set to forestall the Central
Government Budget. As a compliment to these soothsayers on the accuracy of their
prediction, I propose to increase the duty on T.V. sets from 10 per cent ad valorem to
20 per cent ad valorem. Extended play records are also being brought within the
dutiable category. While these proposals will make entertainment costlier for the
wealthy, I am anxious that music, entertainment and knowledge should reach the less
privileged in wider measure at lesser cost. To this end, I propose to exempt totally all
radio-sets produced in the small scale sector and sold to the consumer at a price of not
more than Rs.225 per set. These measures are estimated to bring in a net revenue of
Rs.1.20 crores.
 60. I have been avoiding major changes in the rates of duties on various
cotton textiles, including cotton yarn, except to the limited extent of raising resources
for the States. The rates of duty are ‘specific’ and were fixed in 1969 at a time when
the industry was beset with difficulties. There is, therefore, a clear need for revision,
especially as the industry has since recovered. Cotton textiles being an item of mass
consumption, I am quite alive to the need for forbearance in increasing the rates of
duty on certain categories of yarn and fabrics. My proposals, therefore, cover only
superfine, fine and medium-A fabrics, which are subjected to sophisticated processes,
such as, mercerising/shrink-proofing/sanforizing. In the case of cotton yarn, the
 13

escalations are confined to higher count groups. I have, however, not disturbed the
existing exemptions and concessional rates in respect of yam in straight- reeled hanks
mostly consumed by the handloom sector. I have also rationalised certain exemptions
and compounded levy rates. These measures relating to cotton yarn and cotton fabrics
are estimated to yield an additional revenue of Rs.22.05 crores.
 61. As a measure of rationalisation, which will also earn revenue, I propose
to increase the existing two rates of duty on polyester fibre to a uniform rate of Rs.40
per kilogram. Suitable in creases in the existing rates applicable to different denier
groups of polyester filament yarn, sympathetic revisions in the rates of duty on staple
fibre spun yam, certain categories of blended yam, and an increase in the rate of duty
on resin-bonded slagwool, are also being proposed. These proposals would bring in an
additional revenue yield of Rs.13.99 crores.
 62. In regard to iron or steel, I propose to rationalise certain exemptions relating
to pig iron. steel ingots and products produced with the aid of electric furnace, and to
products made out of duty paid cut-pieces of steel ingots, which will result in an
additional revenue of Rs.7.20 crores.
 63. The rates of duty for various categories of paper and board are ‘specific’
and require review from time to time. I propose to make suitable upward revisions in
the existing rates on paper and paper board, apart from rationalising certain exemptions
and classifications. The concessional rate of 15 paise per kilogram applicable to the
commoner varieties of printing and writing paper falling within the grammage limit
not exceeding 65 grammes per square metre, the total exemption in favour of newsprint,
hand-made paper and board, as well as existing concessions for smaller paper mills
and newly established units, will, however, continue. These measures will result in an
additional revenue of Rs.10 crores.
 64. As straight revenue-raising measures, I propose to increase by 5 per cent
ad valorem the existing rates of duty an surface active agents, office machines, metal
containers, rolling bearings, welding electrodes, coated abrasives and grinding wheels,
dry batteries, certain categories of glass and glassware, chinaware and porcelainware
and thereby raise an additional revenue of Rs.20.17 crores.
 65. As a part of our efforts to mobilise resources, I propose to levy for the
first time excise duties at varying rates an tooth-paste (including dental cream), electrical
stampings and laminations, specified cutting tools, tape and cassette recorders, cast-
alloy permanent magnets and sensitised photographic paper and board. In the matter
of new levies, Members will be reassured to know that suitable exemptions for smaller
manufacturers have been provided wherever necessary. These new levies would bring
in an-additional revenue of Rs.8.20 crores.
 66. Some minor proposals for changes in excise duty will yield an additional
Rs.3.05 crores. The proposals relating to excise duties account for a net gain in revenue
 14

of Rs.191.97 crores in 1974-75, of which Rs.25.92 crores will accrue to the States and
Rs.166.05 crores to the Centre.
Customs Duties
 67. In the matter of customs duties, in view of the mounting world-wide
shortages and unprecedented rise in international prices of a wide array of imported
goods, my proposals in regard to import duties are no more than marginal. Briefly, I
propose to continue for another year the auxiliary duties of customs and the exemptions
relating to them, with a slight modification. At present, these duties are levied at three
differential rates of 20%, 10% and 5%. I propose to raise the rate applicable to the
middle slab from 10% to 15%. This modification will yield an additional revenue of
Rs.16 crores in a full year.
 68. The only other proposal I have to make concerns whisky, brandy, gin and
certain other spirits by way of an increase in the basic duty from Rs.60 per litre to
Rs.80 per litre. While society at higher levels may, as a result, have to pay a little more
for their’ spirituous relaxation, it will help me in getting some revenue for the exchequer.
 69. Inclusive of additional duties, consequential to the changes in excise duties,
the additional revenue from import duties will amount to Rs.20.05 crores annually.
 70. Taking Customs and Central Excise duties together and exclusive of States’
share, the additional revenue accruing to the Centre will be of the order of Rs.186. 10
crores in a full year.
Posts and Telegraphs
 71. I need now to say a word on behalf of my colleague the Minister Of
Communications. As the House is aware, postal rates have not kept pace with rising
costs. The frequent increases in Dearness Allowance and the heavy additional
expenditure incurred on account of implementation of the Pay Commission’s
recommendations have further pushed up the establishment cost in the Postal Branch
which is highly labour oriented. On the Telecommunications side, also, the operational
costs as well as the cost of equipment required for various projects have been going
up steadily. The Department’s developmental programme to improve the Trunk
Telephone Service by provision of high grade media like Microwave and Co-axial
systems, to install new Exchanges and expand existing ones for meeting the fast growing
demand for telephone connections and to expand the Trunk Dialling and Teleprinter
facilities all entail heavy investments. These various factors necessitate an upward
revision of tariffs in the Postal, Telegraph and Telephone Branches of the Department.
A Memorandum showing the proposed changes in the Posts and Telegraphs Tariffs is
being circulated along with Budget papers. I shall therefore mention only the more
important changes.

 15

 72. The tariff for Postcards is proposed to be increased from 10 Paise to 15
Paise. Even after this revision, the Department will be incurring a loss of Rs.2.43
crores per annurn in running this service. It is proposed to raise the rate of Letter cards
from 15 Paise to 20 Paise and that of Letters weighing upto 15 grams from 20 Paise
to 25 Paise. The Registration Fee is being increased from Re.1/- to Rs.1.25 and the
Parcel rate from Re.1/- for every 400 grams to Rs.1.50 for every 500 grams. The
Posting Fee for Value Payable Post and the tariff for Business Reply Permits are being
revised. The minimum charge for a Non-Press Telegram of ‘Ordinary’ category with
eight words or less is being increased from Rs.1. 20 to Rs.1.50 and for the `Express’
category from Rs.2.40 to Rs.3.00. The charge for each additional word will, however,
remain the same. It is also proposed to increase the rental for telephone connection
both in the ‘measured rate systems’ and the ‘flat rate systems’. As against this, the
number of free calls allowed during a quarter will be raised from 250 to 300. The rate
for each additional call after 300 will be increased from 20 paise to 25 Paise. The
Trunk Call rate structure is being rationalized. While this will involve increase in
Trunk Call charges for distances between 100 and 1300 kilometers, in respect of calls
between stations within 20 kilometers, only the unit fee of 25 Paise will be charged
for an ‘ordinary’ call as against the present 50 Paise for such calls.
 73. These tariff revisions are estimated to bring in additional revenue of
Rs.57.08 crores per annum. The changes would be given effect to from dates to be
notified after the Finance Bill is passed by Parliament. The yield during the financial
year 1974-75 will be of the order of Rs.42.80 crores.
 74. The results of these changes have been accounted for in reckoning the
internal resources of Posts and Telegraphs Department.
 75. So far as the Union Budget is concerned, the various proposals would
imply, for 1974-75 additional revenue aggregating Rs.186 crores. The budgetary
gap of Rs.311 crores I had indicated earlier will accordingly be now scaled down to
Rs.125 crores.
 76. In conclusion, I would like once again to draw the attention of the House
to the developments of last two years which have shown how certain events can
greatly upset the original budgetary calculations. In the year ahead lie more sources of
uncertainty than ever before, which must be tackled speedily and with flexibility. I
would, however, like to say that we do not propose to allow these uncertainties to blur
our vision of the future. The social and economic problems that we currently face can
be resolved in the long run only in the frame-work of a rapidly expanding economy
with socialist objectives. I trust this budget is one more step in that direction.
 (February 28, 1974)




 16

