 PART B
 32. In the light of what I have said earlier, Honourable Members would have
gathered that I would have very much liked to avoid a deficit by the simple method of
containing revenue expenditure and capital outlays within the resources available. I
have explored this possibility to the maximum. Revenue expenditure has been held
down. In the case of Plan outlays, however, it is necessary to provide for what is
required for securing essential and productive development, particularly in regard to
agriculture and other continuing schemes. Consistent with this, Plan outlays have also
been kept down to the minimum. A further reduction would retard agriculture and
jeopardize the growth of the economy.
 10

 33. It is, therefore, Imperative for me to cover the deficit by raising additional
resources. This I have sought to do by methods which cause minimum disturbance
and hardship and ensure maximum simplicity. Honourable Members would recall that
in presenting the last Budget my predecessor had emphasised the importance of stability
and simplicity in the tax structure in the interest of providing a proper climate of
expectations for orderly growth. ‘ The supplementary budget introduced last August
took this process a step further, particularly in regard to the rationalisation of import
duties. I have kept these basic objectives clearly in view in proposing measures for
raising additional resources. Even in so doing, I have sought to carry the process of
simplification a step further by proposing a number of changes and reliefs. I shall now
explain my proposals in detail.
 34. Starting with indirect taxes, I propose to leave customs duties alone as
they were rationalised and raised only a few months ago. I, however, propose to
increase the excise duties on a few commodities, not simply for raising revenue but
also for restraining consumption where this can be done without too much hardship
and increasing exportable surpluses. Two commodities, namely, optical bleaching agents
and synthetic detergents will be subject to duty for the first time.
 35. The excise duty on crystal sugar will be raised from Rs.28.65 to Rs.37 per
quintal. Correspondingly, the duty on khandsari will also be raised. Taken together,
these will bring in additional revenue of Rs.21.93 crores. Assuming the duty is passed
on fully to the consumer, the incidence will be only 8 to 9 paise per kilogramme of
crystal sugar. As supply is expected to be adequate to meet demand, there is some
prospect that the whole of the duty may not be passed on to the consumer.
 36. The duty on cigars and cigarettes, as well as on unmanufactured tobacco
for use in the manufacture of cigarettes and pipe mixtures, will also be raised by about
25 to 30 per cent. These increases are expected to yield additional revenue of Rs.9.01
crores. The incidence of this increase will be about 5 paise per packet of expensive
cigarettes and 1 to 2 paise per packet for the relatively cheaper ones.
 37. The excise duty on diesel oil not otherwise specified, that is, light diesel,
is proposed to be raised by Rs.60 per kilo litre in order to bring it in line with duties
on other petroleum products, so as to avoid undesirable mixtures. The additional revenue
expected is Rs.5.35 crores.
 38. In order to restrain consumption of finer qualities of cloth which require
imported cotton, I propose to increase duties on cotton yarn and cotton fabrics
selectively. There will be no increase in the case of coarser counts of yarn. In the case
of fabrics, the increase will be only in respect of processed products such as mercerised
shrink-proof and organdie processed varieties. The additional revenue from increases
in the duty on yarn is expected to be Rs.7.23 crores and on fabrics Rs.6.3 crores.
Correspondingly, the duties on rayon and synthetic yarns are also being slightly raised
and the revenue yield will be Rs.50 lakhs.
 11

 39. The excise duties on a few other items, namely, sodium silicate and carbon
dioxide are also being raised and the slab concessions on paper boards are being
reduced. The additional revenue expected from these three Items is Rs.1.46 crores.
The new duties on optical bleaching agents and synthetic detergents are expected to
bring in Rs.58 lakhs. In order to give some relief to small establishments which
manufacture motor vehicle trailers, the ad valorem duty of 5 per cent on such trailers
as are manufactured in establishments employing not more than five workers will be
abolished. Altogether, the additional yield from the changes in excise duties proposed
together with corresponding increase in countervailing duties, will be Rs.52.86 crores
of which the States’ share will be Rs.10.07 crores. The Central resources, therefore,
will be augmented by Rs.42.79 crores.
 40. I shall now turn to direct taxes. In the field of personal taxation, I propose
to increase the existing limits of total incomes not chargeable to tax by Rs.500. Similarly,
I propose to raise by Rs.500 the existing personal allowances on which tax relief is
given to resident individuals and Hindu undivided families. Thus, the exemption limit
in the case of individuals will be raised from Rs.3,000 to Rs.3,500 the personal
allowance of an unmarried individual, from Rs.2,000 to Rs.2,500 and the personal
allowance of a married individual with more than one dependent child, from Rs.4,300
to Rs.4,800. The effect of these will be a reduction in revenue by Rs.3.5 crores. The
principal reason is to provide a measure of relief to a class of tax payers who merit
their burden being lightened. But these measures will also accelerate the performance
of the task of the tax authorities by eliminating a large number of small assessments
and thereby enabling them to devote more and swift attention to tax collections from
higher incomes.
 41. For similar reasons, I also propose to raise the exemption limit for annuity
deposits from Rs.15,000 to Rs.25,000. By this measure, the number of people required
to make annuity deposits will be reduced sizeably from 1,76,000 to 80,000, while the
reduction in receipts will only be of the order of Rs.7 crores, after taking into account
the corresponding gain to income-tax of Rs.2.42 crores. I have, however, provided
that even those in the income range of Rs.15,000 to Rs.25,000 who desire to make
annuity deposits, will be enabled to do so and obtain the consequent tax relief on the
amounts so deposited. Another small change which I propose to make is to provide
that persons on attaining the age of 70 will hereafter be allowed to opt out of the
Annuity Deposit Scheme, irrespective of whether they were liable to make annuity
deposits before or not.
 42. Having given these reliefs, I propose to levy a flat special surcharge of 10
per cent of the amount of income-tax and surcharge in respect of earned income and
unearned income, payable by all non-corporate assessees. The additional revenue from
the special surcharge will be Rs.25.6 crores.
 43. In regard to other personal taxes, I propose to abolish the expenditure tax.
I do so for administrative reasons. The yield from this tax is very little, namely, Rs.60
 12

lakhs or thereabouts which has not been commensurate with the burden it puts on the
administration and the inconvenience it causes to the assessees. I recognise that on
purely economic grounds, it would be a very sound principle to replace the income-tax
increasingly by a tax on expenditure, so that the maximum incentive is provided for
savings. Given the substantial contribution made by income-tax to our revenues and
the administrative difficulties and inconvenience to assessees involved in the assessment
of expenditure, it is, however, not possible to attempt this substitution on any significant
scale at the present stage.
 44. I also propose to revise the rates of gift tax in order to bring them more
closely in line with the rates of estate duty. In the process, the rates applicable to
different slabs of value of gifts are also being reduced. Thus, the exemption limit is
being raised from Rs.5,000 to Rs.10,000, the ‘rate on the slab from Rs.10,000 to
Rs.25,000 is being reduced from 8 per cent to 5 per cent and the rates on subsequent
slabs, up to Rs.15,00,000, by varying percentages. The present maximum marginal
rate of 50 per cent will, however, remain unchanged, but it will operate on the slab
beyond Rs.15 lakhs. I also propose to delete the provision for the aggregation of the
value of gifts to the same donee over a number of years. This provision was designed
to prevent avoidance of estate duty as well as gift tax at higher rates. But it is a
measure whose practical utility is not established, specially if the time and trouble it
involves on the part of both the administration and the assessees are taken into account.
But to some extent to balance this measure, I propose to provide, by amendment of the
Estate Duty Act, that gifts made within two years of death will be treated as part of the
estate. At present the relevant period is one year. I have also taken this opportunity to
raise the rates of estate duty on certain intermediate slabs, namely, Rs.1 lakh to Rs.2
lakhs, from 8 per cent to 10 per cent, Rs.31 lakhs to Rs.5 lakhs, from 15 per cent to
25 per cent and from Rs.5 lakhs to Rs.10 lakhs, from 25 per cent to 30 per cent. The
loss in revenue as a result of changes in the gift tax will be Rs.1.71 crores, whereas the
additional revenue from the changes in the estate duty, which will go to the States,
will be approximately Rs.70 lakhs.
 45. I propose to make another change in respect of estate duty. Honourable
Members will recall that my predecessor had assured this House that the estates of
members of police forces killed in action in defending the borders of the country
would be exempted from estate duty in the same manner as members of the armed
forces. I have made a provision for this. I feel this is a recognition, though small, of
the courage and determination of members of this force in defending our country.
 46. Finally, I would like to refer to one change in regard to personal taxation
which will also serve as a transition to my proposals in regard to corporate taxation.
Honourable Members are aware that at present when an equity shareholder is allotted
a bonus share, he is liable to pay income-tax on the notional capital gain accruing to
him. I propose to discontinue this provision and to provide that liability for tax will
arise only when the capital gain is actually realised. The loss to revenue from this
measure will be only Rs.7 lakhs.

 13

 47. I shall now turn to corporate taxation. Here again, as in the case of personal
taxation, I propose to provide certain reliefs which I consider necessary for providing
a suitable climate for growth. At the same time, I propose to increase the general rates
of tax on corporate incomes by approximately 10 per cent. I shall now explain these
proposals in some detail.
 48. The existing tax of 12.5 per cent, levied on domestic companies with
reference to the amount of their bonus issues will be discontinued. The loss to revenue
will be only Rs.9 lakhs.
 49. At present, the dividend tax of 7.5 per cent on companies to which it is
applicable is, ordinarily, leviable on the whole of the dividends declared or distributed
during the previous year. I propose now to provide that this tax will be leviable only
on that part of the equity dividend declared or distributed which is in excess of 10 per
cent of the paid-up equity capital. The loss to revenue on this account is estimated at
Rs.4.8 crores.
 50. I also propose to reduce the rate of surtax provided under the Companies
(Profits) Surtax Act, 1964, from the existing level of 40 per cent to 35 per cent. The
loss to revenue on this account is estimated at Rs.2.5 crores.
 51. As already mentioned, I propose, simultaneously, to raise the effective rates
of the basic corporate tax on companies. Thus, the rate of tax on profits from life
insurance business will be raised from 47.5 per cent to 52.5 per cent. In the case of
domestic companies in which the public are substantially interested with a total income
not exceeding Rs.25,000 , the rate of tax is being raised from 42.5 per cent to 45 per
cent, and the rate of tax on such companies with higher incomes, from 50 per cent to 55
per cent. In the case of closely-held domestic companies also the existing general rate is
being increased from 60 per cent to 65 per cent, and the concessions rate applicable to
industrial companies on the first rupees ten lakhs of their income from 50 per cent to 55
per cent. In the case of foreign companies, royalty and technical service fees under
certain approved agreements will bear the, same effective rate of 50 per cent as at
present, but their other income will be taxed at 70 per cent, as against 65 per cent at
present. Similarly, some fiscal encouragement needs to be given to our industries to
encourage them to provide technical “knowhow” and technical services to newly
developing countries. I propose, therefore, to provide for a concessional rate of tax on
dividends received by an Indian company from a foreign company on shares allotted to
the Indian company in consideration for supplying technical “know-how” or rendering
technical services. This concessional rate will be 25 per cent. A similar concessional rate
of tax of 25 per cent will also be charged on royalties, commissions, fees, etc., received
by an Indian company from a foreign company for supply of technical “know-how” and
technical services. The net gain to revenues as a result of the changes in the basic rates
of corporate taxation is estimated at Rs.43.46 crores, after allowing for the consequent
reduction of Rs.5.6 crores under surtax.

 14

 52. Honourable Members are aware that at present we have separate schedules
of priority industries, one for qualifying for development rebate at the higher rate of
35 per cent and the other for a concessional treatment in respect of the basic corporate
tax. I propose to extend the list of priority industries for the purposes of the development
rebate by inclusion of three more industries, namely, of the manufacture of tea,
newsprint and printing machinery. The same schedule will also apply for purposes of
concessional treatment in the rate of tax. As a measure of simplification, however, I
propose to modify the form of the concession. At present a special rebate on income-tax
and surtax is granted to companies on their income from priority industries. I propose
to replace this by a straight deduction of 8 per cent of the profits from priority industries
in computing the total taxable income of the companies concerned. This direct manner
of giving a rebate should greatly simplify the computation of the tax liability.
 53. At present, 75 per cent of development rebate actually allowed is required
to be put into a reserve. In the case of the shipping industry, I propose to reduce this
requirement to 50 per cent, in order to provide an incentive for fresh investment in
this industry where levels of profitability are relatively low.
 54. In order to provide a further incentive for the extension and renovation of
our tea plantations, I propose to liberalise the existing provisions in the law in regard
to the grant of development allowance. Firstly, the rate of development allowance for
new planting will be increased from the existing quantum of 40 per cent, of the actual
cost of planting to 50 per cent thereof and, for replanting, from 20 per cent to 30 per
cent. Secondly, I propose that the allowance may be granted in two stages, first, for
the year following the year in which the land is prepared for planting or replanting,
with reference to the expenditure incurred up to that year, and, as to the balance, for
the fourth year. This will replace the existing provision under which the whole of the
allowance is granted only for the fourth year.
 55. The rate schedule of depreciation allowable in respect of buildings,
furniture, plant, machinery, etc., has become highly complicated. It is necessary to
review the position in the light of recent developments and to make appropriate changes
so that the schedule may be both rational and simple. I propose, therefore, to initiate
a complete review during the next few months. The recommendations of the Working
Group on Plantations Labour Housing will also be taken into account during this
review. Meanwhile, I propose to provide that the cost of small items of plant and
machinery costing not more than Rs.750 per unit may be allowed to be depreciated in
full in one year. I also propose to allow initial depreciation of 20 per cent on the cost
of new buildings erected by employers and occupied or used by employees drawing
remuneration upto Rs.7,500 per annum. At present, this is allowed only in the case of
buildings occupied or used by those drawing remuneration upto Rs.200 per month.
 56. At present when development rebate is allowed, the plant and machinery
concerned is required to be retained in the possession of the assessee for a period of
8 years; otherwise, the rebate already allowed is liable to be withdrawn. When such
 15

plant, however, is transferred in the course of amalgamation, including merger of a
subsidiary company with the parent company, the development rebate is not withdrawn.
This is, however, subject to the qualification that the merged subsidiary company is an
Indian company. I do not see any reason for the exclusion of a foreign subsidiary as
it comes in the way of merger of such companies with their parent companies. I,
therefore, propose to withdraw this disqualification.
 57. At present, approved financial corporations which are engaged in providing
long term finance for industrial development in India are entitled to deduct, in the
computation of their profits, an amount up to 10 per cent of their total income carried
to a special reserve account. In order to enable relatively small financial corporations
to build up their financial resources at an accelerated pace, I propose to increase this
deduction from 10 per cent to 25 per cent of the total income, in cases where the
paid-up capital of the corporation does not exceed Rs.3 crores. This will benefit mainly
those financial corporations which are engaged in fostering industrial development on
a regional basis.
 58. I propose to make a number of changes relating to closely-held companies.
Firstly, in determining whether a company is to be regarded as closely-held, I propose
that for such of them as are mainly engaged in certain manufacturing activities or in
ship-building, the test of the public being substantially interested should be regarded
as satisfied if 40 per cent of the equity is held by the. Government, public corporations
or members of the public, etc., instead of 50 per cent, as at present. Secondly, companies,
which are mainly engaged in ship building will not be compelled to distribute their
profits upto the statutory percentage. Companies which are only partly engaged in
manufacturing activities will also not be required to make a compulsory distribution
of their profits relating to such activities. Finally, certain types of expenditure incurred
by a closely-held company for earning its income are at present not allowed for purposes
of determining the tax liability. I see, however, no reason why such expenditure should
not be allowed as a deduction in computing the distributable income of such a company.
I propose to provide for this.
 59. Honourable Members are aware that certain fiscal concessions have already
been announced in respect of the National Defence Remittance Scheme. Thus, capital
gains arising on the sale of bank certificates obtained under the Scheme would be
liable to tax at the concessional rate of tax applicable to long-term capital gains, even
though such certificates may have been transferred by the holder within a period of 12
months from the date of receiving the certificates. Non-residents who make a gift of
foreign exchange to a resident in India by making a remittance under the Scheme
would also be exempt from the gift tax. I have made provisions for these concessions
in the relevant Acts.
 60. With a view to encouraging small savings, the requirement of deduction
of tax at source will be waived, subject to certain conditions, in the case of small
investments in Government securities. Similarly, the interest on the new series of
 16

National Savings Certificates to be issued through the State Bank will bear the same
concessional treatment as the existing series of National Savings Certificates. In the
case of income from units of the Unit Trust of India, income upto Rs.1,000 win be
excluded from total income for purposes of tax assessment in the case of all assessees
irrespective of the amount of their other income. This should make for simplification
as wen as greater incentive for investment in the Unit Trust.
 61. Finally, I would like to mention some other changes that I have proposed
essentially in the interest of simplification or better administration. I propose that the
total income of assessees should be rounded to the nearest multiple of ten rupees and
that the amount of tax, penalty, refund, etc., should be rounded to the nearest multiple
of one rupee. As a measure of curb on ostentatious consumption, I propose that for the
calculation of depreciation on motor cars acquired for the purposes of a business or
profession, purchase price above Rs.25,000 will be ignored. Those who are responsible
under the law for deducting tax at source will be charged, in case of default in fulfilling
these obligations, simple interest at the rate of 6 per cent per annum for the period of
the default. Another amendment relates to exemption of the income of charitable
trusts and institutions from income-tax. It is being provided that a charitable trust or
institution will forfeit the right to exemption if any part of its income or property is
used or applied directly or indirectly for the benefit of those who might be closely
associated with the trust or foundation as authors, substantial contributors or their
relatives.
 62. Before I sum up the effect of the tax proposals which I have explained so
far, I would like to make two proposals designed to raise resources for the benefit of
the States. The first is to increase from 2 per cent to 3 per cent the rate of Central
Sales Tax leviable on inter-State sales. This will come into effect from 1st July, 1966.
This increase will yield an additional revenue of Rs.19 crores to the States in a full
year and Rs.9.5 crores in the year 1966-67. Since the new rates will become effective
from 1st July, 1966 and since collections are carried over from one quarter to the
other, the additional yield during the next financial year will accrue only during two
quarters of the year. Similarly, collections in the Union Territories which form part of
the Consolidated Fund of India will increase by Rs.1 crore in a full year and Rs.50
lakhs in 1966-67.
 63. The second proposal is to raise from 2 per cent to 3 per cent the ceiling
prescribed in respect of sales tax on goods declared to be of special Importance in
inter-State trade or commerce. This is a permissive amendment and would enable the
States to refix the rates of local sales tax on coal, cotton, cotton yarn, hides and skins,
Iron and steel, jute, and oil seeds within-the ceiling of 3 per cent if they so desire. If
all the States raise their local sales tax rate to the permissible ceiling of 3 per cent
from the prescribed date of 1st July 1966, it would give them an additional revenue of
Rs.7.5 crores in the next financial year. During a full year, however, the additional
revenue would be Rs.15 crores.
 17

 64. I shall now sum up the effect of my proposals. The additional yield resulting
from the changes in the excise duties proposed will be Rs.52.86 crores of which the
share of the States will be Rs.10.07 crores. The gain to the Central budget will, therefore,
be Rs.42.79 crores. The net effect of the changes in regard to personal taxation would
be again to revenue of Rs.22.14 crores. The additional yield from corporate taxation,
after taking into account the concessions in regard to the dividend tax and surtax and
the elimination of the tax on bonus issues, will be a gain to revenue of Rs.36.07
crores. The changes in the inter-State sales tax which I have referred to will bring in
an additional revenue of Rs.50 lakhs to the Centre. The total revenue effect of my tax
proposals is an addition of Rs.101.51 crores. On the capital account, there will be a
reduction in the yield of annuity deposits of Rs.9.39 crores. The total additional
resources thus available for reducing the deficit of Rs.117 crores will, therefore, be
Rs.92 crores, leaving an overall gap of Rs.25 crores.
 65. Honourable Members will note, however, that the changes I have proposed
will also augment the resources of the States to a significant extent. Apart from their
share of Rs.10.07 crores in union excise and additional yield of Rs.69 lakhs in respect
of estate duty, they will get Rs.34 crores in a full year from the two changes that I
have proposed in respect of the sales tax.
 66. In conclusion, may I say that I am keenly aware that by the compulsion of
circumstances I have had to propose additional resource mobilisation on a considerable
scale. The underlying budgetary position with which we end the current financial year
is itself not very satisfactory. This alone has required maximum restraint on both Plan
and non-Plan expenditure. At the same time, there are minimum claims of defence,
development and drought relief which we cannot disregard without peril. In distributing
the additional burdens, however, I have endeavoured to make the spread equitable
among the different sections of the community and to put the strain where it can best
be borne. I have also incorporated a number of reliefs and changes which are designed
considerably to simplify the tax structure and which, I hope, will provide a better
climate for orderly growth. Honourable Members would also appreciate, that, in
presenting my budget proposals, I have kept clearly in view the need to make the
economy stable. To this end, I would have liked to avoid deficit financing altogether
and to budget for some surplus. If I have left a deficit of Rs.25 crores, it is only
because of my firm belief that a greater degree of resource mobilisation would be self
defeating as it would come in the way of the buoyancy of production and revival of
confidence which are so urgently required. I cannot conclude my presentation of the
Budget without sharing with you, Sir, and the Honourable House a sentiment of
optimism in this that we are together and determined to change our fiscal climate for
the better. In whatever walk of life, in field or farm, factory or workshop, in offices or
Parliament, Sir, I earnestly invite every citizen of our country to share with us in this
House the task of building a more prosperous and happier India, truly free from fear
and from want.
 (February 28, 1966)
 18

