 PART B
 79. Now, I turn to my tax proposals.
 80. The good news is there are no new direct taxes save one and even that
solitary new tax, I am confident, will be almost universally welcomed.
 81. There are pressing demands from all sections of society to raise the
threshold limit for personal income-tax from the existing level of Rs.40,000 to at
least Rs.60,000. Each increase of Rs.1,000 in the threshold limit will cost the
exchequer Rs.150 crore and, since 77.5% of this loss will be borne by the States,
any major concession on this front will put a severe strain on the States’ financial
resources. Besides, when the direct tax base is already narrow - only 110 lakh
persons pay income-tax - no Finance Minister can afford to let 20 or 30 lakhs of
them go out of the net. However, I accept the need to provide relief to the assessees
in the first tax bracket, especially the salaried class. I propose to do so in two ways:
first, I propose to reduce the income-tax rate for the first bracket from 20 per cent
to 15 per cent. This benefit will be available to all assessees. I also propose to raise
the standard deduction from Rs.15,000 to Rs.18,000 for salaried employees having
an income upto Rs.60,000. Thus, a salaried employee with an income of Rs.60,000
per year, making the minimum contribution to his provident fund, will now pay no
tax at all. If he has no savings, he will still pay only Rs.300.
 82. We owe a special consideration to our senior citizens. At present, senior
citizens benefit from a special tax rebate of 40% upto an income level of Rs.100,000.
I propose to raise this to Rs.120,000.
 83. House-owners, residing in their own houses that have been financed
by borrowing, deserve relief. The deduction of interest payments of Rs.10,000 allowed
to them from their income from property is proposed to be raised to Rs.15,000.
 84. As another relief measure, I propose to raise the limit under section
80D of the Income-tax Act for deduction in respect of insurance on the health of
the individual and his family members from Rs.6,000 to Rs.10,000.
 85. I have already mentioned the new scheme of personal-cum-family
pension being introduced by LIC. In order to encourage savings in this form, I

 15
propose to allow the contribution to the pension fund to be deducted from taxable
income upto a limit of Rs.10,000 per annum. I also propose to exempt the income
of such a pension fund in the LIC from the levy of income-tax.
 86. At present, a five year tax holiday is available under section 80-IA to
enterprises engaged in developing, maintaining and operating infrastructure facilities
such as roads, highways, bridges, new airports, ports and rail systems. I propose
to extend this incentive to investment in irrigation, water supply, sanitation and
sewerage systems.
 87. I also propose to provide a five year tax holiday under section 80-IA of
the Income Tax Act to companies exclusively created to participate in research and
development activities. I am also simplifying the existing procedure for giving
weighted deduction under section 35(2AA) of the Income-tax Act on sums paid for
scientific research to a National Laboratory or a University or an Indian Institute of
Technology by deleting the condition of approval by an outside body.
 88. Infrastructure funds have become an important source of capital to
finance infrastructure projects. In order to encourage such funds established to
mobilise resources for financing infrastructure facilities, I propose to exempt them
from income-tax. Any dividend, interest or long-term capital gains of such funds or
companies from investments in the form of shares or long-term finance in any
enterprise set up to develop, maintain and operate an infrastructure facility will be
free from income tax.
 89. I also propose to allow investment in approved debentures or equity
shares of public companies as eligible for tax rebate under section 88 if the proceeds
of such public issues are applied to create a new infrastructure facility or to generate
or distribute power. In the case of such investment, the limit of Rs.60,000 under
section 88 will be raised to Rs.70,000.
 90. Corporate tax rates have been reduced and simplified over the past few
years and the results have been very encouraging with a significant increase in
corporate taxes as a percentage of GDP. However, there are two issues which need
to be addressed. The first is the promise made in the past that the corporate
surcharge will be temporary. The other is the phenomenon of zero tax companies
which, according to many observers, reflects an excessive degree of laxity in the tax
regime. I propose to respond to the two issues as follows:
 (i) I am reducing the rate of surcharge on corporation tax from 15% to 7.5%
 and hope to take a similar step in my next budget. The reduced tax
 burden will benefit all companies big and small.
 (ii) I propose to introduce a “Minimum Alternate Tax” (MAT) on companies. In
 a case where the total income of the company, as computed under the
 Income Tax Act after availing of all eligible deductions, is less than 30 per
 cent of the book profit, the total income of such a company shall be
 deemed to be 30 per cent of the book profit and shall be charged to tax
 accordingly. The effective rate works out to 12 per cent of book profit
 calculated under the Companies Act. Companies engaged in the power

 16
 and infrastructure sectors will, however, be exempted from the levy of
 MAT.
 91. As a step towards achieving a level playing field for Indian companies
vis-a-vis the foreign companies, I propose to reduce the tax on long-term capital
gains in the case of domestic companies from 30 per cent to 20 per cent.
 92. In order to encourage savings and to channelise savings into investments
in priority sectors of the economy, I propose to exempt from tax long-term capital
gains if the net consideration received or accruing from the transfer of the capital
asset is invested in specified assets for a period of three years or, alternatively, if
the entire capital gains are invested in specified assets for a period of seven years.
The assessee will now have a choice of two new savings instruments.
 93. I also propose to allow depreciation in the case of fractional ownership
of assets because of the need for joint financing of big, capital intensive projects by
a consortium of financiers having fractional shares in the assets.
 94. In order to promote efficiency in industry, I propose to provide that
unabsorbed depreciation will be carried forward for a period of eight years only in
the same manner as business losses.
 95. The practice of sale-and-lease-back of assets results in passing of very
high depreciation to the leasing concerns. This needs to be curbed. Hence, I propose
to provide in the Income Tax Act that in case of sale-and-lease-back transactions,
the written down value of the asset, in the hands of lessee, who was the previous
owner, will be treated as cost in the hands of the lessor. This measure, while not
affecting bona fide transactions, will prevent loss-making concerns from indulging
in unhealthy trade-off of depreciation.
 96. I find it unreasonable that commercial properties, not used by the
assessee as his business, office or factory premises, should be outside the levy of
wealth-tax. Accordingly, I propose to plug this unintended loophole and levy wealth-
tax on such commercial properties.
 97. Other measures of tax relief proposed by me include—
 (i) Allowing a special deduction of Rs.15,000 to the patient or guardian of a
 patient of protracted diseases like cancer or AIDS involving considerable
 expenditure on treatment.
 (ii) Exempting under section 10(24) of the Income Tax Act the income of an
 Association of Registered Trade Unions.
 (iii) Extending 100 per cent deduction under section 80G of the Income Tax
 Act to—
 (a) Donations made to Illness Assistance Funds established by the Central
 government and the State governments to meet the medical expenses of
 the poorest of the poor;
 (b) Donations made to State and National Councils of Blood Transfusion
 recently set up by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare; and
 (c) Donations made to the three funds established by the armed forces of the

 17
 country. These are the Army Central Welfare Fund, The Indian Naval
 Benevolent Fund and the Air Force Central Welfare Fund. This is my way
 of saluting the brave officers and jawans of our armed forces.
 98. As a part of our obligation to SAARC I am exempting from income tax
the income of SAARC Fund for Regional Projects (SFRP).
 99. In order to promote industrial development in the North-Eastern region
of the country, a North-Eastern Development Finance Corporation was established
in August, 1995. I propose to exempt its income from tax.
 100. These proposals are likely to result in an improvement of revenue under
direct taxes which is estimated at Rs.912 crore.
 101. I shall now come to the proposals relating to indirect taxes.
 102. Over the last few years steps have been taken to reform our indirect tax
structure by reducing the number of rates, removing exemptions and by switching
over to ad-valorem rates. On the customs side the peak rate of duty was reduced
to 50% in 1995-96 accompanied by reduction in rates down the line in respect of
all commodities. Central excise duties were also revamped and moved closer to a
Value Added Tax with the introduction of Modvat for capital goods and extension of
input credit facilities to almost all items necessary for the manufacture of goods.
These changes have contributed to the growth in industrial production, simplified
the tax structure and brought about greater transparency. They have also led to
strong growth in revenues, with indirect tax collections increasing by 19 per cent
in each of the last two years, in spite of substantial reduction in rates. The Common
Minimum Programme mandates the government to continue with tax reforms and
I propose to do so.
 103. Keeping in view the twin objectives of making our industry globally
competitive and providing it reasonable levels of protection in the transitional period,
I propose to take measured and calibrated steps in the matter of customs tariffs.
 104. The salient features of my proposals are—
 · Reduction in customs duties on crude oil and other basic petrochemical
 intermediates.
 · Reduction in the rates of customs duties on raw materials and inputs
 such as chemicals, plastics, natural rubber and ferrous and non-ferrous
 metals.
 · Substantial reduction in customs duties on raw materials and components
 required for giving a thrust to the electronic goods sector.
 · Reduction in the rate of duty on computers for giving a boost to the
 software industry.
 · Reduction in import duty on selected machinery to modernize the textiles
 and garment sector.
 · Removal of several anomalies in duty rates.

 18
 · Unification of rates on similar items in order to substantially reduce
 disputes on classification and on rates.
 · Retention of only such exemptions which are necessary, for the present.
 105. India has become a major producer and exporter of chemicals. This
industry has shown a healthy growth in the last two years. This is an area in which
India can exploit its potential of trained technical manpower and become a leading
nation of the world in the production of chemicals. To achieve these objectives, I
propose to take the following steps:
 · Reduction in the rate of duty on crude oil from 35% to 25%.
 · Reduction in the rate of duty on bitumen from 30% to 10%.
 · Unification of rates at 10% on petrochemical building blocks such as
 cumene, toluene and cyclohexane.
 · Reduction in the rate of duty on chemicals, both organic and inorganic,
 from 50% to 40%.
 106. Our textile industry employs millions of people. It is necessary to modernise
it and provide an environment in which it can grow rapidly. I propose the following
measures:
 · Reduction in the import duty on rayon grade wood pulp from 25% to 5%.
 · Reduction in the import duty on acrylonitrile from 20% to 10%.
 · Reduction in the rate of duty on DMT, PTA and MEG from 35% to 25%;
 however in the case of caprolactum the revised duty will be 30%.
 · Reduction in the rate of duty on artificial and synthetic fibres from 45%
 to 30%.
 · Unification of the rates of duty on nylon filament yarn, polyester filament
 yarn and viscose filament yarn from the existing levels of 45% and 40% at
 30%.
 107. I also propose a major restructuring of excise duties in the textile sector,
extending the benefit of Modvat, to which I shall come a little later. I am confident
that with these measures our textile industry will grow from strength to strength in
the coming years.
 108. Our power plants face a shortage of coal on account of growing demand
and better utilisation of installed capacity. I propose to reduce the rate of duty on
non-coking coal from 35% to 20%. I also propose reduction of duty on coke from
the existing level of 25% to 20%.
 109. Our plastics industry is coming of age. I propose a reduction of duty on
plastics from 40% to 30%. Further, on articles of plastics I propose a reduction
from the existing level of 50% to 40%.
 110. In regard to rates of duties on drugs and pharmaceuticals, I propose to
retain the zero rate of duty on life saving drugs. I also propose to reduce the rate

 19
of duty on all other allopathic medicines from 50% to 40%. In order to make
available veterinary drugs commonly used I propose to reduce the rate on specified
veterinary drugs from 15% to 10%.
 111. There has been a persistent complaint from industry that customs duty on
metals is very high and this makes it difficult for downstream industry, especially
capital goods, to be competitive. Industry has been demanding that the rate of duty
on metals should be brought down drastically. However, realising the need to provide
adequate time to our metals industry to adjust itself to global competition, I propose
a modest reduction from 35% or 40% at present to a peak rate of 30% on all metals
except nickel and aluminum. On unwrought aluminum and unwrought nickel I
propose to retain the current level of 10% and 20% respectively. On wrought
aluminum I propose to reduce the duty from 25% to 20% and on wrought nickel
from 30% to 20%.
 112. While I do not wish to tamper with the rate of duty on machinery which
stands at 25%, I propose a reduction of duty on signaling and safety equipment for
railways, airports, sea ports etc. from the current level of 50% to 25%.
 113. The last three years have witnessed a tremendous growth in our electronic
industry which has been the result of enterprise as well as the stimulation provided
by sharp reduction in customs duties. In order to maintain this trend, I propose
the following changes:
 · On raw materials, from the existing 15% to 10%
 · On components, from 25% to 20%.
 · On glass shells for colour TVs, from 30% to 25%.
 · On colour picture tubes, from 40% to 30%.
 · On computers and computer peripherals, from 40% to 20%.
 · Finished goods will continue to attract 50% rate of duty.
 114. With a view to encourage sports in the country, I also propose to reduce
import duty on sports goods from 50% to 30%.
 115. In order to give relief to professional press photographers I propose to
allow them to import free of duty photographic equipment upto Rs.1 lakh. A similar
concession is also being extended to accredited journalists for import of personal
computer, typewriter and fax machine.
 116. Telecommunication is a growing sector and will turn out to be the life-line
of our economy. The existence of an efficient telecommunication net work is a pre-
requisite for accelerated economic growth. In order to give a boost to the efforts
being made by the Department of Telecommunications, I propose that the duty on
parts and sub-assemblies of telecommunication equipment be reduced from 35%
to 30% and on finished equipment from 50% to 40%. In order to avoid the temptation
to smuggle cellular phones, pagers and trunking handsets, I propose to reduce the
customs duty on them to 30%.
 117. Upgradation of medical standards in the country is extremely important. I,
therefore, propose to reduce the rate of duty on specified equipment, not generally

 20
made in India, and their parts from 15% to 10% and on other medical equipment
from 40% to 30%.
 118. Edible oils now carry a rate of duty of 30%. This is an important item of
daily food for the masses and we have a chronic shortage of edible oils in the
country. I propose to reduce the import duty on edible oils from 30% to 20%.
 119. Mr. Speaker, Sir, earlier in my speech I dwelt on the dire need to step up
investment in infrastructure. I had also detailed the sectors to which I propose to
make large allocations. I have to raise resources to meet these requirements. I
intend to ask importers to share the burden of building the infrastructure in this
country because, ultimately, it will help raise production and enhance
competitiveness. I, therefore, propose a levy of 2% as special customs duty on all
imports except those that carry nil rate of duty or are imported at nil rate of
customs duty for export production under the various duty free licences. This levy
will not apply to gold and silver imported by eligible passengers or under special
import licences. This is likely to yield about Rs.1600 crore in the current year.
 120. Importers will be happy to know that the Reserve Bank of India is
announcing today the withdrawal of the interest rate surcharge of 25% on import
finance imposed in February, 1996.
 121. I now come to my proposals regarding central excise. A large number of
countries in the world today have a value added tax system which has been
recognised to be the most efficient form of commodity taxation. I am glad to note
that some State governments are moving towards the value added tax system. The
last few years of reforms have taken us closer to having a Central VAT, but there
are still certain legal obstacles.
 122. Our central excise structure still has 11 ad-valorem rates. The rates range
from 0 to 50 per cent. Ideally there should be only four rates of excise duties Ñ
zero, a lower rate of excise duty on goods of mass consumption, a single normal
rate on all other goods and a higher rate on luxury items. It is absolutely necessary
for us to move towards this rate structure so that we put an end to wasteful
litigation and have a transparent and simple tax structure. It was not possible in
the time available to me in preparing this Budget to achieve this goal in the current
year. However, I propose to take the first step this year and I am confident that we
will achieve a four-rate excise duty structure in another year or two.
 123. I propose to integrate the tax on the textile sector with the mainstream of
central excise duties by introducing the Modvat principle in this sector. Hon’ble
Members are aware that at present excise duties are levied at the fibre and yarn
stage and there is only an additional excise duty, in lieu of sales tax, on fabrics.
This is one of the most inefficient ways of taxation as it results in very high duties
on inputs, which encourages evasion; it does not capture value addition; and it
denies the industry an opportunity of claiming Modvat input credit on capital
goods, chemicals and yarn. While modernisation of other industries is taking place
speedily, our textile industry has not been able to participate fully in this process
because of this lopsided tax structure. I, therefore, make the following proposals.
 124. I propose to reduce the excise duty on yarn in the case of polyester filament
yarn from the current level of 50% to 40% and unify the rates on other yarn at

 21
20%, except nylon filament yarn and cotton yarn for which the present rates of
30% and 5% respectively will be retained. In order to provide Modvat for the textile
sector, I propose to impose a basic excise duty of 5% on cotton fabrics and 10% on
other fabrics which will be collected at the processed fabric stage. The processors
would be in a position to Modvat the duty paid on yarn imputed on the basis that
yarn accounts for 50% of the value of the finished fabric. I have adopted a simple
procedure of imputed value to avoid the imposition of a basic duty on grey fabrics
which are manufactured by thousands of power-looms. Such power-looms will,
therefore, continue to be outside the excise net. Composite mills and textile
processors will be able to avail themselves of Modvat facilities hitherto not extended
to them. This restructuring of excise duty, together with the substantial reduction
in customs duties on selected machinery and on inputs for the textile sector, should
provide a major boost to the textile industry. I believe that this will also simplify the
calculation of drawback rates for garment exporters.
 125. In my proposals on customs duties, I have proposed a reduction in customs
duty on crude oil from 35% to 25%. This is part of a restructuring and rationalisation
of the duty structure aimed at encouraging efficient refineries and enabling me to
shift the duties from the input stage to the product stage. I propose to make up the
loss on customs duty by adjusting the excise duty upward from 10% to 15% on all
petroleum products except LPG and kerosene. The proposed changes in customs
and excise duties taken together are revenue neutral and will have no impact on
the administered prices of petroleum products.
 126. Honourable Members are aware that almost all articles of mass consumption
are already exempt from excise duty and a large number of other widely consumed
articles carry a rate of only 10%. I propose to exempt some more articles from
excise duty. They are:
 (a) Vanaspati and margarine;
 (b) Writing and printing paper supplied to all State Text Book Corporations;
 (c) Animal fats and oils;
 (d) Asbestos fibre;
 (e) Metallic ores; and
 (f) Tapioca products.
 127. I propose to reduce the duty on the following articles:
 (a) Tooth paste, from 20% to 10%;
 (b) Detergents, from 30% to 25%;
 (c) Cartons, boxes and bags made of paper and paperboard, from 20% to
 10%;
 (d) Glassware produced by semi-automatic process, from 20% to 10%;
 (e) Glassware used for table, kitchen etc., from 15% to 10%;
 (f) Articles of asbestos cement, from 25% to 20%; and
 (g) Ceramic articles, other than glazed tiles, from 20% to 15%.
 128. I also propose to raise the exemption limit for footwear from Rs.50 to Rs.
75 per pair.
 129. The rates of excise duty on motor vehicles are not in consonance with the
accepted classification of such vehicles. I therefore propose the following
rationalisation:

 22
 (a) Duty on motor cars and other motor vehicles principally designed to carry
 not more than six persons, excluding the driver, will remain unchanged at
 40%.
 (b) Duty on motor vehicles principally designed to carry more than 6 persons
 but not more than 12 persons, excluding the driver - 20%
 (c) Duty on other motor vehicles for transport of persons or goods - 15%.
 There is no change in the duty on two-wheelers or tractors.
 130. If there is one area in which a Finance Minister can both tax and please,
it is cigarettes. Today, however, I shall please you only in a small way by proposing
modest increases in the specific duties on cigarettes ranging from about 5% to 71/
2%. In the case of non-filter cigarettes, not exceeding 60 mm in length, popularly
called mini cigarettes, I propose to raise the tax by 25% from Rs.60 per thousand
to Rs.75 per thousand.
 131. In order to encourage R & D efforts in India I propose to exempt goods
developed and patented in India and concurrently in specified countries from the
levy of excise duty for a period of three years. I am also rationalising the exemption
from customs duty for import of equipment and consumables for R&D institutions.
 132. I have proposed the addition of potassium chlorate, copper powder and
cigarette lighters to the list of goods eligible for duty exemption under the SSI
scheme. The reduction in import duties proposed elsewhere will also substantially
benefit the small scale industries. In order to benefit hundreds of small scale
manufacturers of matches I have decided to dispense with the physical control
system operating on them and introduce the self- removal procedure freeing them
from the day to day bother of control. I hope SSI match units will respond with
substantial increase in payment of excise duties.
 133. I have proposed rationalisation of rates and exemptions both in customs
and excise in several other areas. I would not like to take the time of the House by
going into these details.
 134. Our excise procedures are outdated and not in tune with the times. They
need to be modified. They should encourage voluntary compliance with tax laws by
the tax payers. With effect from 1st October,1996, assessees would no longer be
required to furnish copies of invoices along with the monthly returns. All that they
would be required to furnish to the excise department will be a simple Return
indicating the duty paid on self- assessment basis. Wherever possible the assessees’
computers could also be linked to the Department’s computers for on line
assessment.
 135. I also propose to introduce a scheme of selective audit by the excise officers
and dispense with the existing scheme of routine examination and checking of
returns and documents furnished by the assessees. This scheme would also come
into force from 1st October, 1996.
 136. I am sure that these changes would be widely welcomed by the
manufacturers who are required to pay excise duties and I expect them to comply
with the laws faithfully. However, I wish to affirm government’s resolve to deal with

 23
tax evaders sternly. I am proposing suitable changes in the Customs and Excise
Acts to provide for mandatory penalty, together with interest, for evasion of duties
on account of fraud, collusion, misstatement or suppression of facts. Henceforth,
the mandatory penalty for evasion of duty on these counts shall be equal to the
amount of duty evaded. Tax evaders would also be required to pay interest starting
from the first day of the succeeding month in which the duty evaded ought to have
been paid and also face criminal prosecution.
 137. Mr. Speaker, Sir, the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944, reminds us of the
colonial era when excise duty was collected on salt. There is no excise duty on salt
and hence the reference to salt is outdated. I propose to delete all references to salt.
 138. The Modvat scheme which provides for duty credit on inputs and capital
goods has been liberalised considerably over the past few years. Still, there are
problems about the coverage of certain inputs and capital goods. I propose to
clarify the scope of eligible capital goods by specifying the heading and sub-headings
of the tariff relating to capital goods in the Modvat Rules. It is also a matter of
concern that there is misuse of the Modvat credit scheme. At present, Modvat
invoices can be issued by any dealer registered with the excise department and this
facility is reportedly being misused. Therefore, I propose to restrict the issue of
Modvatable invoices by dealers upto two stages. Suitable provisions are also being
made in the Modvat Rules for charging of interest in the case of wrong availment
of Modvat credit and for mandatory penalty for misuse of Modvat facility.
 139. The tax on services has come to stay. With a view to widening the tax base,
I propose to bring in advertising services, radio paging services and courier services
under the tax net. The tax on these services will be at the rate of 5%. While this
measure is expected to yield Rs.150 crore in a full year, I am taking credit only of
Rs.70 crore in the current year.
 140. My proposals relating to reduction in customs duties are estimated to
result in a loss of Rs.650 crore in the remaining part of the current financial year.
However, by taking into account receipts from the special customs duty estimated
to be Rs.1600 crore, there will be a net gain of Rs.950 crore in customs revenue.
 141. In the case of excise duties, including additional excise duties, a gain of
Rs.760 crore is estimated. Of this, the States are likely to get Rs.384 crore as their
share of excise duties.
 142. I now have something to say on behalf of my colleague, the Minister of
Communications. Postal rates, some of which were last revised in 1990, do not
meet even the direct cost of most of the services resulting in increasing budgetary
support. Not with-standing this, no change in the rates of ordinary postcard, letter,
parcels and other postal services is being proposed. A modest increase is proposed
only in respect of two services which are used for business and commercial purposes.
The rate of the printed post card is being increased from 60p. to Re.1 and the
registration fee is being increased from Rs. 6 to Rs.8. It has also been decided to
introduce a new category of postcard, called Competition Postcard, which alone
may be used for responding to any competition organised on or through television,
radio, newspapers or magazines. It is proposed to remove the unintended
subsidisation by fixing the tariff for this category of postcard at Rs.2. The changes

 24
will take effect from a date to be notified after the Finance Bill is passed. The
revisions proposed are estimated to yield a modest revenue of Rs.38 crore in 1996-
97, still leaving a large postal deficit.
 143. Copies of notifications giving effect to the above changes in customs and
excise duties will be laid on the Table of the House in due course.
 144. My budget proposals have many implications both for the expenditure side
and the revenue side. However, Hon’ble Members will be pleased to know that the
end result is satisfactory. The revenue deficit in 1996-97 is placed at Rs.31,475
crore or 2.5% of GDP which is significantly lower than Rs.33,331 crore in RE 1995-
96 or 3% of GDP. The fiscal deficit comes to Rs.62,266 crore in 1996-97, which is
lower than the figure of Rs.64,010 crore in RE 1995-96. As a percentage of GDP,
the fiscal deficit is 5% in 1996-97 compared to 5.9% in the previous year. I hope to
do better in my next budget and move along the path of reducing the fiscal deficit
to below 4%.
 145. Mr. Speaker, Sir, at the end of this exercise, I ask myself what is a budget
about? While it is a measure of the health of the economy, it is also a mirror to the
travails and aspirations of the people. 2000 years ago, Saint Tiruvalluvar laid down
the golden rule for the King’s Ministers:
 “Iyattralum, eettalum, kattalum, katta
 Vakuthalam Vallath Arasu”
 (To be able to increase wealth, to lay it up and guard,
And also well to distribute it, marks a royal lord.)
 146. I have made an attempt to raise revenues without putting any burden
upon the poor, to allocate large resources for agriculture, irrigation, infrastructure
and the social sector, to provide more funds for basic minimum services, to give tax
reliefs to the salaried and the middle classes and to promote savings and investment.
I have strived to serve the seven objectives that I declared at the outset.
 147. The Common Minimum Programme is absolutely right when it says that
the country’s GDP needs to grow at over 7% per year in the next 10 years in order
to abolish poverty and unemployment.
 148. I believe that our economy is on a high growth curve. Wisdom dictates that
we remain on that curve. In order to do so, we need more reforms, not less. We
need more resources, not less. We need more discipline, not less. And we need
more compassion, not less. If we remain true to the Common Minimum Programme,
we shall overcome our difficulties and take India to the frontline of the nations of
the world. This budget, my maiden effort, attempts to blend Ñ I hope in the right
proportions Ñ courage and compassion, reform and restraint and growth and social
justice.
 149. Mr. Speaker, Sir, with these words, I commend this budget to this august
House.
 [22nd July, 1996]

