 PART B
 41. Before describing the tax proposals in detail, I would like to share With
Honourable Members the general considerations underlying these proposals. As I have
already mentioned, in the prevailing inflationary conditions in the country it would
not be prudent to have a large deficit in the Budget. Moreover, there are the inevitable
commitments arising out of the resource requirements for the Fifth Plan. If adequate
resources are to be raised for financing the Fifth Plan, action has to begin in this very
year. I have therefore no alternative but to propose some additions to the tax burden.
 42. Both direct taxes and indirect taxes have to contribute to raising resources
for our development. As Honourable Members are aware, the Direct Taxes Enquiry
Committe, under the chairmanship of Shri K. N. Wanchoo, ex- Chief Justice of India,
has made a number of proposals in the field of direct taxation. I have carefully examined
these proposals and am submitting a separate Bill to give effect to such of these
recommendations as are acceptable to the Government. Some of the recommendations
which have a bearing on the raising of resources are being implemented through the
present Budget proposals. In making these proposals I have also taken account of the
Report of the Committee on Taxation of Agricultural Wealth and income headed by
Dr. K. N. Raj.
 43. In the present circumstances, there is no escape from using indirect taxes
also to raise additional resources. However, I have taken care that in the process
articles of mass consumption are left untouched. This will become evident as I unfold
my proposals.
DIRECT TAXATION
 44. As Honourable Members are no doubt aware, the Committee- on Taxation
of Agricultural Wealth and income has suggested several measures for mobilisation of
resources from the agricultural sector. One of their principal recommendations is that
agricultural income should be taken into account in determining the rate of tax
applicable to non- agricultural income. This will help to reduce sharp disparities in the
tax burden on persons with similar incomes. I consider this recommendation of the
Committee to be well-conceived, and am accepting it. I am therefore making provision
in the budget for aggregation of both the agricultural and non- agricultural components
of a taxpayer’s income for purposes of determining the rates of income-tax that will
apply to the non-agricultural portion in cases where the taxpayer has non- agricultural
income exceeding the exemption limit. For the purpose of determining the rate of
income tax applicable to the non~ agricultural portion of a taxpayer’s income, the first
5,000 rupees of his non-agricultural income will be appropriated to the lowest slab,
which is exempt from tax. The agricultural income will be appropriated to the middle
slabs, and the balance of the non- agricultural income will be appropriated to the
upper slabs of the aggregate income. This scheme of partial integration will apply to
the case of individuals, Hindu undivided families, unregistered firms, association of
persons, bodies of individuals, and artificial juridical persons.
 10

 45. It is generally recognised that the present system of tax treatment of Hindu
undivided families has encouraged tax avoidance. It is my view that the unintended
tax benefits currently available to Hindu undivided families should, to the extent
possible, be neutralised. I therefore propose to provide separate rate schedules, in
respect of both income-tax and wealth tax, with higher rates applicable to Hindu
undivided families having one or more members with independent income or wealth
exceeding the exemption limit. This is one of the recommendations of the Direct
Taxes Enquiry Committee. It is also proposed to bring the minimum exemption limit
in the case of all Hindu undivided families to the uniform level of Rs.5, 000 applicable
in the case of individuals.
 46. Capital gains tax can become a means of avoiding or reducing the burden
of payment of income-tax. At present capital gains arising from the sale or transfer of
capital assets held by a taxpayer for a period exceeding 24 months are entitled to
concessional tax treatment. I propose to extend this period to 60 months. As a result,
only capital assets held by a taxpayer for a period exceeding 60 months will qualify
for concessional tax treatment applicable in relation to long-term capital assets.
 47. Where industrial undertakings are required to shift as a result of compulsory
acquisition of land and buildings, I propose to exempt, as a measure of relief, capital
gains arising from the payment of compensation in such cases if the gains are reinvested
for the acquisition of land and buildings for re-establishing the undertakings or starting
new industrial ventures within a period of three years of the acquisition.
 48. I also wish to encourage long-term savings through life insurance, and
provident fund contributions. At present, 100 per cent of the first Rs.1,000 of qualifying
savings, plus 50 per cent of the next Rs.4,000, and 40 per cent of the balance is
allowed as deduction in computing taxable income. I propose to allow a deduction
equal to 100 per cent of the first Rs.2,000 of the qualifying savings. The quantum of
deduction in respect of next Rs.3, 000 will continue at the existing rate of 50 per cent
and in respect of the balance at the rate of 49 per cent.
 Sports lovers will be glad that donations to approved sports institutions will
qualify for tax-relief in the same manner as donations to charities. I shall be happy if
this leads to improvement in the facilities provided to young, sportsmen.
 49. It has been a basic policy of the Government to encourage small and
medium entrepreneurs with comparatively small resources to form public companies.
Towards this objective, I propose to raise the limit up to which a concessional rate of
income tax is applicable in the case of widely-held companies from Rs.50,000 at
present to Rs.1 lakh. Under the existing schedule of rates, closely held companies in
the corporate sector pay income-tax at a concessional rate on the first Rs.10 lakhs of
their industrial profits. I propose to reduce the slab on which the concessional rate is
applicable from Rs.10 lakhs to Rs.3 lakhs. It is hoped that this. measure will encourage
conversion of these companies into widely-held companies, and thereby broaden the
base of the ownership of industry.
 11

 50. At present there is some doubt whether management compensation in
respect of business undertakings or other property the management of which is taken
over by the Government is liable to tax. To set this matter beyond doubt, I intend to
introduce a provision to treat such management compensation as income from business
liable to tax. This will apply retrospectively from the assessment year 1972-73.
 51. Under the existing law, income tax is deductible at source from the
payments made by Government, statutory corporations, local authorities and companies,
to contractors in respect of works or labour contracts. I propose to include cooperative
societies also in the category of taxpayers required to deduct tax at source from
payments made by them to contractors.
 52. The Credit Guarantee Corporation of India has been formed for the
purposes of guaranteeing advances made by banking companies to the hitherto neglected
sectors of the economy. This is a laudable purpose and I propose to exempt the income
of this Corporation from tax for a period of five years.
 53. In my budget speech for 1971-72, I gave notice of Government’s intention
to withdraw the development rebate in respect of ships acquired, or plant and machinery
installed after May 31,1974. In response to the demand that this should be substituted
by other fiscal concessions to impart a continuing momentum to industrial growth in
the country, I had indicated that I would come up with some specific proposals for
encouraging industries in selected sectors and those in backward areas. In pursurance
of this undertaking, I am giving an indication of certain measures which Government
has in mind for this purpose, as also for promotion of research and development, and
exports. I propose to bring necessary legislation in the course of the year to give effect
to these proposals.
 54. It is my intention to provide an initial depreciation allowance of 20 per
cent of the cost of machinery and plant installed in selected industries after May 31,
1974. This would provide additional resources to the concerned enterprises in the
early years of their development. A list of the industries to which this will apply is
under consideration.
 55. In order to provide a stimulus to investment in backward areas I intend to
accord preferential tax treatment to industries to be set up in such areas after March
31, 1973. Specifically, the intention is to allow a deduction equal to 20 per cent of the
profits derived by an industrial undertaking set up in the backward areas in computing
its taxable profits. This concession will be available for a period of 10 years from the
establishment of the industry. The ceiling on investment eligible for subsidy will also
be raised from Rs.50 lakhs to Rs.1 crore, and the percentage of subsidy will be raised
from 10 per cent to 15 per cent of the investment.
 56. I feel it is important to enlarge the area of fiscal incentives for promoting
research and development, particularly in the field of industry. I also feel that inadequate
 12

attention to this aspect is retarding the development of indigenous technology and
therefore of self-reliance in industry. At the moment capital expenditure in regard to
scientific research related to the business activity of the taxpayer during three years
immediately preceding the commencement of business is allowed to be written off
against the profits of the year in which the business is commenced. I propose to
extend this concession, covering revenue expenditure, in regard to payment of salaries
to research personnel, and on material inputs, during the pre-investment period. I also
propose to allow a weighted deduction equal to one and one-third the amount paid for
sponsored research and development work, in approved laboratories.
 57. Honourable Members will agree with me that it will be a paying proposition
for sizeable development expenditure to be incurred in developing exports, particularly
of non-traditional products. At present expenditure on export market development is
deductible for tax purposes to the extent of 133.3 per cent of actual costs. In view of
the great importance of promoting our exports, I propose to increase the weighted
deduction to 150 per cent in the case of widely held companies.
 58. I am very conscious of the need to encourage the increase of employment
in industry so that its growth may be oriented towards labour rather than capital
intensive techniques. We are considering schemes which may serve this purpose.
 59. The total additional revenue from the various measures in the field of
direct taxes enumerated by me will be Rs.31 crores in a full year and Rs.18.6 crores
in the year 1973-74, of which the share of the Central Government will be approximately
Rs.14 crores.
INDIRECT TAXATION
 60. Sir, in turning to indirect taxes next, I intend to take up Central excises
ahead of customs, in reversal of the normal order of precedence in deference to the
former being the major contributor to our revenues.
EXCISE DUTIES
 61. In doing so, I would like first, to refer to the effort I propose to make for
raising revenue on behalf of the States through additional duties of excise. Honourable
Members will recall that this is the third and final year for the fulfilment of our
commitment to the States to raise these duties in lieu of sales tax leviable on three
commodities, namely, sugar, tobacco and textiles, so as to achieve an overall incidence
of 10.8 per cent of the value of their clearances by the end of 1973-74. To reach this
target, I shall have to raise about Rs.25 crores in this Budget. In carrying out this
exercise, I have been faced with considerable difficulty because one of the commodities,
sugar, is at the moment a somewhat sensitive item, and, another namely textiles, does
not seem to offer much scope. That leaves me with no choice but to fall back on the
“old faithful”, cigarettes, to help me out of the predicament. Tobacco has been a much
maligned commodity almost from the days of its discovery. While I would certainly
refrain from adopting any attitude of castigation towards the numerous devotes of the
 13

tobacco leaf, I shall be content if those who take pleasure from the use of this weed
will contribute in some higher measure to the national Exchequer.
 62. Experience has shown that the existing slab system whereby cigarettes
pay fixed percentages of ad valorem duties depending on the ranges or slabs of value
in which they fall, has been leading to the creation of dead areas in which no brands
of cigarettes can flourish. By the very nature of the scheme there is also an in-built
temptation towards the artificial depression of the values of certain brands which, I
feel, will not only affect their quality but also, in the long run, the revenue from
cigarettes. I, therefore, propose to resort to a more progressive system by adopting the
simple principle that the better a cigarette, the more it pays. Starting with an aggregate
base of 100 per cent ad valorem (for both basic and additional duties) at a value of ten
rupees per thousand, the levy will rise at a steady rate of 5 per cent for every additional
rupee or part thereof in value, till it reaches the present aggregate statutory ceiling of
300 per cent, which, if this. is any consolation to smokers, I do not intend to revise
upward. By suitable inter se adjustments in the basic and additional duties I hope to
raise Rs.32 crores in a full year, of which the major share of Rs.24 crores will go to
the States by way of additional excise duties.
 63. I am afraid I cannot, while coming down on the cigarette smoker make
things easier for the pipe smoker or the person who rolls his own cigarettes. I therefore
propose to levy a duty on manufactured smoking mixtures for pipes and cigarettes,
which will yield about Rs.80 lakhs, of which Rs.22 lakhs will accrue to the. States.
 64. I have been concerned over the tendency of certain textile manufacturers
to avoid payment of the legitimate duties on cotton and art silk fabrics by cutting up
good fabrics into smaller pieces of fents and, into pieces of cloth which are euphemistic
ally called rags. I have, as the first step towards curbing this tendency, already revised
the definitions of fents and rags by reducing their length criterion. As the second step
I now propose to increase suitably the duties on fents and, for the first time, prescribe
duties for rags. If these measures do not have the desired effect, it might become
necessary to consider more drastic steps.
 65. There have been complaints that the duty incidence on certain blended
fabrics manufactured with an ingredient of cotton is lower than on similar fabrics in
which viscose is used in place of cotton. I propose to remove this disparity.
 66. A situation has been created where, because of the total exemption enjoyed
by artificial silk fabrics processed without the aid of power or steam, there is a growing
tendency on the part of some art silk units to resort more and more to processing their
fabrics with non-power operated machines. This cannot be allowed to continue. In
making such fabrics also liable to duty now, I have, however, ensured, in the interests
of equity, that the incidence on them is kept 40 per cent lower than it would be had
power been used.
 14

 67. The above measures on textiles are expected to yield Rs.3.65 crores of
which about Rs.1 crore will accrue to the States by way of additional excise duties.
 68. The combined effect of the proposals detailed so far will net for the States
a total revenue of Rs.25 crores in a full year.
 69. With my commitment to the States by way of additional duties thus
fulfilled, I must now, in my continuing search for extra resources, turn to another
commodity that has often come to the help of the Finance Minister in the past. I am
referring to motor spirit. Honourable Members will recall that I had increased steeply
the duty on motor spirit in 1971 with a view to curbing its consumption. Since then,
and as though to give me adequate justification for resorting again to the curbing
mechanism, there has been a pronounced$ spurt in the use of petrol. I propose therefore
to apply the curb and also raise some revenue by increasing the duty on motor spirit
by Rs.80 per kilolitre so as to yield Rs.19.20 crores per year.
 70. I also intend to take this opportunity for making a few modifications in
regard to certain petroleum fractions which are classifiable as motor spirit, particularly
raw naphtha, where there is need for economy in its consumption. However, in doing
so, the existing concessions for the use of naphtha in the manufacture of fertilisers, as
also fuel in the manufacture of steel, will be left untouched. These minor modifications
will net an additional revenue of Rs.1.60 crores.
 71. When the levy was first imposed on compounded and blended lubricating
oils and greases I had granted relief to the smaller manufacturers by exempting such
products manufactured without the aid of power from duty. I, however, find that
even some of the bigger manufacturers have stepped into a territory not really meant
for them, by changing their production to methods where power is not used so as to
avoid paying duty. Honourable Members will appreciate that I cannot allow such
avoidance to go unquestioned. I, therefore, propose to withdraw the existing criterion
and effectively confine the concession to the smaller manufacturers by prescribing
it on a quantity-slab basis. I also propose to increase the effective rate of duty on
such oils and greases from 13 per cent to 15 per cent. These measures will yield
Rs.2.35 crores.
 72. While on this subject of the ingenuity of manufacturers I would like to
mention the parallel instance of nylon yarn spinners who have started adjusting the
denierage of their yarn in a way that will enable them to pay lower duties taking
advantage of the denierage grouping system on the basis of which the rates of duty are
levied. To cite an instance, in the first group where the cut-off point is 30 deniers,
production has shifted to yarn of 31 and 32 deniers, which therefore pays only a lower
duty. I propose to rectify the situation by suitably re-adjusting the existing denier
groups.

 15

 73. The next measure I propose is meant to facilitate the collection of duty on
synthetic fibres and yarn. This I intend doing by exempting the raw materials, such as
polymer chips, used in such manufacture, from duty and suitably readjusting the duties
on the finished nylon, acetate and polyester yarn and fibres. However, in doing so, I
have ensured that the existing incidence of duty on nylon yarn used in the manufacture
of fishing nets and parachute cords remains unaffected.
 74. These measures relating to synthetic yarn and fibres will result in an
additional revenue of Rs.7.85 crores.
 75. Keeping in view the need for a higher degree of taxation on luxury articles
used by the more affluent, I propose to increase the duties on a few selected items.
Refrigerators and air-conditioners will pay 60 per cent and their parts, including parts
of their machinery, will pay 75 per cent. The proposed increase on refrigerators will
not, however, affect those of a capacity not exceeding 165 litres which are used by the
middle class consumer. Refrigerating and air-conditioning machinery for industrial
undertakings and public-run hospitals are not being touched. The duty on domestic
electrical appliances, as also on decorative plywood, will be raised to 25 per cent.
However, commercial plywood will pay lower rates of 29 per cent and 15 per cent
depending on the square area of such plywood. Plywood for tea-chests also remains
unaffected. The rest of this list of items consists of motor vehicle parts, instant coffee,
shaving cream and long playing records. The proposed duty on gramophone records
will apply to the more expensive long-playing variety only.
 76. These various measures in the aggregate will yield Rs.8.33 crores.
 77. My next proposal is for the addition of a few items to those already in the
excise net, namely caustic potash, carbon black, carbide tool tips, wire ropes, and
certain rubber chemicals. All these, (except carbide tool tips which will pay 20 per
cent), will bear a duty at the normal general rate of 10 per cent that is levied on raw
materials in the Central Excise tariff. Glycerine which has so long been paying specific
duty will also join their number. These levies are expected to yield Rs.3.60 crores.
 78. I also propose to modify., enlarge, or rescind a number of concessions
that exist at present. Without cataloguing them in detail, I shall mention a few of each
variety. Some of the existing concessions given for paper mills some years back have
been found to be out-dated. I propose to replace them with certain others aimed at
benefiting future expansions of smaller paper mills and also attracting new capital
investment to the industry. The scope of exemption fixed on a quantitative basis for
paper mills having no bamboo plants attached to them will also be enlarged. The use
of unconventional raw materials like bagasse, and cereal straw, will be further
encouraged by liberalising the existing concession. Among the list of concessions that
are being withdrawn are those relating to certain producers of rayon yarn and to low-
voltage electric motors, sheet glass and plate glass. and glass fibre and yarn. Acrylic
sheets produced out of duty paid plastic materials, and p.v.c. films of specified thickness
 16

and layflat tubings produced by the small-scale sector, will be exempted. These diverse
measures will result in an additional revenue of Rs.3.60 crores.
 79. Before I go on to deal with customs duties, I would like to make a reference
to a matter which concerns both kinds of duties. Honourable Members are aware that
Parliament has been sanctioning enabling provisions for levy of regulatory duties of
excise and customs on a year to year basis from 1963. Regulatory duties were intended
as special fiscal measures to be resorted to only for certain purposes. I propose to
replace them by new straightforward revenue raising provisions. For certain reasons it
is not possible to incorporate the provisions in rate tariffs, or make them part of
taxation statutes and they would therefore have to be revived from year to year for the
present. The new provisions now proposed levy auxiliary duties both on excisable
goods and imported goods at an amount equal to 20 per cent of the value of such
goods. These levies have however been limited to a level needed to raise resources for
the Centre by granting exemptions wherever and to the extent warranted, for which
suitable provisions have been made in the relevant clauses of the Finance Bill.
 80. I shall wind up my catalogue of excise proposals by referring to how I
intend to resort to this provision m the excise side. In the case of aluminium, jute yarn
and jute manufactures, other than hessian, copper and zinc, the auxiliary levies will
continue at the same levels at which they were hitherto charged by way of regulatory
duties. In the case of steel ingots and iron and steel products (other than skelp), however,
the rate will be 75 per cent of the effective basic duty as against 50 per cent hitherto
levied as regulatory duty. This measure in the case of iron and steel is necessary in
order to bring about a further reduction in the gap between imported and indigenous
prices.
 81. In the case of steel as well as all other metals, the auxiliary duties will
apply, however, only to indigenous production, and will not be attracted by way of
countervailing duty on imports.
 82. While on this subject I would also like to mention a modification I propose
to make in the exemption on steel products produced by electric furnaces. These
secondary steel producing units which are scrap-based are at present enjoying an
exemption of the ingot stage duty on the products made by them. The extent of such
benefit, which was only 75 rupees per metric tonne prior to December 1971, has
nearly doubled since then, and is likely to increase further with the modification now
being made on iron and steel. In the circumstances I propose to impose on furnace
steel a levy of Rs.50 per metric tonne at the ingot stage. This will, of course, be
subject to 75 per cent of this basic duty as auxiliary duty, in the same way as other
steel. I would not consider this impost in any way inequitable, for it still leaves a
considerable advantage in favour of furnace, steel as compared to what the major steel
plants have to pay at the ingot stage.

 17

 83. These proposals after setting off the revenue that will be foregone by
dropping regulatory duties, will yield Rs.34.60 crores of which Rs.29 crores will
accrue to the Centre.
IMPORT DUTIES
 84. It is time now to turn to customs duties where my proposals can be broadly
categorised under three main heads.
 85. The first relates to auxiliary duties, which I propose to apply on the Customs
side by means of three differential rates of 20 per cent, 10 per cent and 5 per cent of
the value of imported goods, All those paying an effective customs duty of 100 per
cent ad valorem or more, will pay 29 per cent as auxiliary duties; those paying 60 per
cent ad valorem and more, but less than 100 per cent, will pay 10 per cent; and the rest
of the goods will pay 5 per cent. However, food rains, books, family planning appliances
and a few other selected categories of goods, as well as three other items to which I
shall presently refer, will be totally exempt from auxiliary duties of customs.
 86. After making allowance for the revenue that will be foregone by
dropping regulatory duties this measure is expected to bring in an additional revenue
of Rs.36.50 crores.
 87. The second proposal is regarding the modification of the rates of duties
presently bound under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Pending re-
negotiations with the concerned contracting parties we have been permitted to modify
the bound rates under the Agreement to the extent necessary for the rationalisation of
the tariff rate structure. Consequent on this I have decided to revise the rates of duty
on a number of items which among them will include wood pulp, tallow and a few
plastic materials. These revisions of rates are expected to yield an additional Rs.18.70
crores in a full year.
 88. My last proposal relating to customs is a selective revision of the existing
rates of duty on a few items.
 89. It is necessary to give a further impetus to import substitution and encourage
more extensive manufacture of machinery in our country. I feel that a fiscal incentive
is needed for this purpose which I propose to administer by making an across-the-
board increase in the rate of duty on all machinery from the existing level of 30 per
cent to 40 per cent. This will be applied also to certain allied items.
 90. Raw cotton has been enjoying a privileged position for a long time with
only a nominal concessional duty of 10 paise per kilogram. Since imported cotton is
used mainly for the production of fine and superfine fabrics and comparatively
expensive varieties of blended fabrics which, in the nature of things, are expected to
be used by the more affluent sections of society, I propose to withdraw this concessional
rate and make raw cotton liable to its 40 per cent statutory rate, which is the normal
level of taxation for raw materials in the Customs Tariff.
 18

 91. However, raw cotton along with two other items, amely, tallow and
machinery, will not be subjected to auxiliary duties of customs.
 92. Copper which has been paying a rate of duty at 30 per cent will pay 40
per cent which is the normal rate applicable to nonferrous metals.
 93. Since the margin of profit on stainless steel sheets is considerable, I propose
to raise the rate of duty on them from 100 per cent to 200 per cent. However, the duty
on stainless steel plates and strips will be fixed at a lower rate of 60 per cent.
 94. As a measure of assistance to indigenous industry, the concessional rate
of 60 per cent so far applicable to nylon yarn used in tyre manufacture is proposed to
be withdrawn.
 95. I also propose to raise the rate of duty on unexposed cinematograph films
from 15 paise to 50 paise per linear metre.
 96. These various measures relating. to revisions of rates of customs duties
are expected to yield Rs.97.30 crores in a full year.
 97. In addition to this, countervailing duties of customs which will
automatically accrue because of the proposed changes in excise duties will account
for an additional Rs.3.50 crores.
 98. To sum up, all the proposals regarding excise and customs duties that I
have listed so far will yield about Rs.274 crores. The measures relating to customs
duties will yield about RS.156 crores. From the excise duties, which will be of the
order of Rs.118 crores, Rs.38 crores will accrue to the States.
 99. I may now briefly summarise the revenue implications of the various
proposals that I have outlined earlier in my speech. The additional yield from direct
taxes in 1973-74 will be Rs.18.6 crores. Of this, Rs.4.7 crores will accrue to the
States, leaving Rs.13.9 crores for the Centre. The excise duty proposals will yield
additional revenue worth Rs.118 crores in 1973-74. Of this amount, nearly Rs.38
crores will go to the States and the balance of Rs.80 crores will accrue to the Centre.
The additional revenue from customs duties will amount to Rs.156 crores. In all, the
Central revenues will benefit from the total package of my proposals to the extent of
Rs.250 crores. As a result, the initial deficit of Rs.335 crores estimated at 1972-73 tax
rates will be reduced to Rs.85 crores. This however will be increased by the provision
which will have to be made in connection with the report of the Pay Commission.
 100. Sir, before concluding I would like to point out that this is the third regular
budget that I have been privileged to present to this august House. During each of
these budgets, I have had to come forward with proposals for significant amounts of
additional taxation. This was not a pleasant task. It was however inevitable in the light

 19

of resources required to meet our basic commitments to the people and the
unprecedented challenges of the difficult times we have lived through. The poverty
and the associated inequalities in income and wealth that prevail in this country cannot
be abolished over night. But there can never be any doubt about the direction in which
the Government is determined to move to sustain people’s faith in our democratic
polity as an effective vehicle of rapid social change. It is in this context of our firm
commitment to socialism, rapid economic growth and a self-reliant economy that the
budget proposals must be appraised. The building-up of a socialist society requires a
sustained multi- dimensional effort to transform our social and economic structure. In
an economy where a large number of people are ill-fed and ill-clothed we cannot
afford the luxury of maintaining the status quo. Fiscal policy must assist in this
process. This is the vision I have kept in mind in formulating this year’s budget.
 101. The increased provisions for employment programmes and the continuing
emphasis on selected schemes of social welfare are part of an attempt to reduce the
existing inequalities of income and consumption. The partial integration of agricultural
and non-agricultural income, and the imposition of higher income-tax rates on Hindu
undivided families, are designed to make our tax system more equitable and progressive.
The pattern of proposed additions to indirect taxes will also serve the same purpose.
I have made every effort to ensure that additional levies do not impose an undue
burden on the common man. On the other hand, small savers will benefit positively by
the proposed liberalisation of tax exemptions for contributions to provident funds and
life insurance. The introduction of initial depreciation allowances for selected high
priority industries after 31st May 1974 will strengthen this country’s industrial structure
and thereby help in the realisation of the goal of self-reliance. Concessions for research
and development will further stimulate the growth of indigenous technology and
contribute to self-reliance. The enhancement of the weighted deduction presently
allowed in respect of export market development must also be seen in the con~ of the
nation’s determination to move speedily towards self-reliance. Incentives for
industrialisation of backward areas that I have indicated will help to reduce the existing
regional inequalities in the level of development which are clearly inconsistent with
the ideals of a socialist society. As I see it the budget for 1973-74 represents another
major effort on the part of this Government to get the country moving towards the
goal of an expanding self-reliant economy based on social justice.
 (February 28,1973)




 20

