 PART B
 49. The deficits in the current and the ensuing years are somewhat exceptional,
the significant contraction of revenue coinciding with an increase in. the quantum of
development expenditure met from revenue. Although in the past we have been realising
surpluses on revenue account every year, I feel that it would be unwise to leave the
deficit in the coming year wholly uncovered. In past the comfortable revenue position
was partly due to the resilience of revenue and partly to shortfalls in expenditure
inevitable while the country is in the process of gearing its administrative machinery
to implement an expanding development plan. Both these factors are ceasing to operate.
The buoyance of revenue in the past was mainly under Customs but because of the
drastic cuts in imports and the progressive freeing of our exports from export duty,,
Customs revenue has suddenly contracted and is likely to remain static for some
 14

years. The administrative machinery is now better equipped for implementing the
Plan and budgetary provisions are likely to be spent more fully than in the past. For
all these reasons I think that a part of the deficit next year would have to be covered.
This would also be consistent with our policy of continuously mobilizing additional
resources for the Plan.
 50. In determining the extent to which the prospective deficit should be
covered, I have taken into account the amount by which taxation has been increased
in the last two years. Our record in the matter of raising additional resources by way
of taxation for the Plan has, I venture to think, been quite impressive since the Second
Plan came into operation. In 1966-57, taking the proposals in the original and the
supplementary budgets together, the total taxation raised was of the order of Rs.80
crores. In the following year, we did even better and touched nearly a hundred crores.
In the current year, the net additional taxation was not significant but, taking the three
years of the Plan together, the additional taxation has been quite substantial. Having
this in mind, I propose to cover only about a fourth of the anticipated deficit of Rs.82
crores in the coming year.
 51. The next problem is how to distribute this additional taxation between
direct and indirect taxes. We have only just achieved an integrated scheme of direct
taxation and I think that for the present we should concentrate on improving the
administrative machinery, simplifying the existing procedures and plugging loop-holes.
By these methods we should be able to improve our revenue from these sources
without many major changes. They cannot, however, produce immediate results and,
although my proposals include certain changes in the rates in this field also, the bulk
of the additional revenue next year will, I fear, have to come from indirect taxes. I
shall first deal with indirect taxation and then proceed to direct taxation.
INDIRECT TAXATION
 52. In the field of indirect taxation my proposals are mostly by way of
readjustments of rates and concessions in the existing duties of excise. These are
described in some detail in the memorandum circulated with the budget papers and I
shall only mention them briefly here.
 53. The duty on refined diesel oils and vapourising oil is being raised from 40
naye paise per imperial gallon to 80 naye paies. There is at present a price advantage
in favour of diesel oil of which we have to import substantial quantities. Both as a
measure of increasing revenue and conserving foreign exchange the proposed increase
is justified. As a consequential adjustment, the rate of duty on low-speed diesel oil is
also being increased from Rs.40 per ton to Rs.50 per ton. The total yield from these
two measures will be Rs.7.85 crores a year.
 54. The duty on art silk fabrics is being raised from 6 pies per square yard to
8 naye paise per square yard. Simultaneously the, exemption in the present form in
 15

respect of products of the first nine looms will be reduced to four looms. The increased
levy is amply justified by the large profits which are made by the industry. The estimated
yield will be Rs.1 crore a year. The lowering of the exemption will also bring in Rs.2p
lakhs by way of additional duties which accrue to the States.
 55. The effective rates of duty on rayon yarn and staple fibre are also being
raised by 60 per cent to yield an additional Rs.50 lakhs.
 56. The duty on motor vehicles tyres is being raised from 30 per cent ad
valorem to 40 per cent ad valorem. There will be no change in the rate of duty on
cycle tyres. The additional revenue is estimated at Rs.1.75 crores.
 57. An increase is also being made in the duty on vegetable product which
will increase from Rs.7 per cwt. to Rs.8.75 cwt. with a corresponding adjustment in
the exemptions in favour of the small producers. The additional revenue will be
Rs.95 lakhs.
 58. Vegetable non-essential oils were first subjected to excise in 1956, but
some preference to medium and small scale producers was given by exempting
production up to 125 tons per annum on a slab basis. In 1957 the free slab was
brought down to 75 tons and a lower rate of duty levied on production between 75
tons and 125 tons. These concessions have been reviewed and it is now proposed to
withdraw the exemption from all power driven units and limit the concessional levy to
only the first 75 tons of production. These changes, which will be made by notification
and will not affect village ghanis in any way, are expected to yield Rs.4.4 crores.
 59. Khandsari sugar is now exempt from excise duty but pays the usual sales
taxes. There has always been a fiscal preference in favour of this sugar but, with the
recent substantial increases in the duty on crystal sugar, this preference has further
widened resulting in the shift of production to this form of sugar. There are cogent
reasons for reducing the margin and this is being done by the levy of the basic duty of
Rs.5.60 per cwt. with an additional duty of 70 naye paise in replacement of the sales
taxes. The basic duty will yield Rs.1.82 crores and the additional duty which will
accrue in its entirety to the States, Rs.25 lakhs.
 60. Certain adjustments are also being made in the duty on various kinds of
cigarettes involving an increase of 16 per cent in the level of duties for cigarettes
taken as a whole. These adjustments are expected to yield a revenue of Rs.1.5 crores.
 61. Incidentally, the present tariff on unmanufactured tobacco has led to some
diversion to biri-making of tobacco which was previously used for hookah. I am
taking powers to assess at the higher rate such varieties of tobacco as may be specially
notified and as are actually used for the making of biris.
 62. The incidence of excise and export duties on tea has been under continuous
review. It has been decided to readjust the rate of excise duties on the teas grown in
 16

certain areas of the country and to reduce, at the same time, the effective rate of export
duties from 26 naye paise per lb. to 24 naye paise per lb. These changes will result in
an additional revenue of Rs.58 lakhs under Union excise and a reduction of Rs.93
lakhs in the yield from the export duty. In the net, the industry will benefit to the
extent of Rs.35 lakhs.
 63. The total additional revenue from the various measures I have just
mentioned will amount to Rs.20.35 crores from the basic duties and Rs.45 lakhs from
the additional duties in replacement of sales taxes which accrue to the States. As
Hon’ble Members are aware, the basic duties on tobacco, vegetable product, tea,
sugar and vegetable non-essential oils are shared with the States in accordance with
the award of the last Finance Commission. Twentyfive per cent of the net additional
revenue from these commodities will have to be distributed to the States, after deducting
the cost of collection. This payment will be of the order of Rs.2.27 crores. Allowing
for this and for the additional duties to be paid to them, I am taking the net additional
revenue from changes in Union excise duties at Rs.18.08 crores.
 64. I propose to make no major change in regard to customs duties. But there
will be a countervailing increase in the import duties on the commodities on which
excise duties are being increased an)d this by itself will bring in an additional revenue
of Rs.3.65 crores. The reduction in the export duty on tea will, however, involve a
drop of Rs.93 lakhs in revenue as I have mentioned earlier. I propose to make a small
increase in the duty on unexposed cinema films to yield Rs.5 lakhs a year for the
benefit of the Film Finance Corporation which is being set up. With this small addition
the net additional yield from customs duties next year will amount to Rs.2.77 crores.
DIRECT TAXATION
 65. I propose to increase, with effect from 1959-60 the Wealth tax payable by
individuals and Hindu undivided families by half a per cent at each slab. The new
rates of Wealth tax on individuals will be 1 per cent on wealth in excess of Rs.2 lakhs
but upto Rs.12 lakhs, 11/2 per cent on the excess between Rs.12 lakhs and Rs.22 lakhs
and 2 per cent on any excess above that. For Hindu undivided families, corresponding
changes will be made. The extra revenue on this account will be Rs.2.5 crores.
 66. The revenue from Expenditure tax has been quite disappointing this year.
It is a new tax, not tried anywhere else in the world, and in the first year of its
imposition in our country, it is only right that we should have proceeded cautiously. I
think, however, that the time has come to tighten the existing law to some extent. I
propose, therefore, to withdraw some of the exemptions now available and, in particular,
to provide that the husband, wife and minor children should be regarded as one unit
for the exemption limit of Rs.30,000 in the matter of non-taxable expenditure and not
as separate assessees if they have incomes in their individual rights.
 67. Coming to income tax, I propose to make no change in the present rates
and structure of personal income tax. I have, however, some proposals for changing
 17

the present system of taxation of company profits and dividends. At present, an Indian
company is generally required to pay income tax at 30 per cent plus a surcharge of 1.5
per cent and super tax at 20 per cent on its total income. When dividends are declared
out of the balance after payment of these taxes, a portion of the income-tax paid by
the company is deemed to have been paid by the shareholders themselves. In the
assessments of the latter, the dividends received by them are included in their income
after being “grossed” and they are credited with the amounts deemed to have been
paid by the company on their behalf. This process of grossing is somewhat complicated.
For one thing, the rate of grossing depends on the effective rate at which the company’s
profits are initially subjected to tax. The effective rate in its turn depends upon the
composition of the income of the company. The dividends themselves may be paid out
of reserves accumulated over some years, which again complicates the determination
of the effective rate at which the profits have been taxed. Further, the assessments of
shareholders have to await the completion of the assessments of the companies. All
these lead to considerable inconvenience to all concerned, and the scheme I propose
seeks to avoid this.
 68. The main points of this scheme are briefly these. The legal fiction of
deeming the income-tax paid by the company as having been paid by the shareholder
and the complicated process of grossing the dividends received by the latter will be
abolished. The overall tax rate hitherto applicable to Indian companies will be so
fixed that the yield will be equal to the present annual gross yield less the annual
credit now given to the shareholders. The tax liability of the shareholders will no
longer be related to the tax borne by the companies. So far as the shareholders are
concerned, companies will deduct tax at a prescribed flat rate and credit it to
Government. This tax will be re-imbursed to the shareholders at the time of their
assessment as is done today in the case of interest on Government securities. I hope to
devise a scheme for issuing exemption certificates for small shareholders so that the
question of re-imbursement does not arise in their cases.
 69. The scheme will be implemented in two stages. In the first stage, that is,
during 1959-60 income-tax will be deducted by the companies at the same rate as for
Government securities from dividends distributed by them but only from dividends
declared for the year the profits of which will be assessed to tax in 1960-61; for
example, dividends declared for the year ending 30th June, 1959. Dividends declared
for any earlier year, the profits of which are assessable in 1959-60 (for example,
dividends for the calendar year 1958) will not be subject to this deduction and will
continue to be assessed under the existing provisions. During the second stage, that is
during 1960-61, the overall tax rate applicable to the companies under the scheme will
come into operation. The present scheme of grossing of dividends will cease to operate
from 1st April, 1960 in respect of dividends declared for the accounting year relevant
to the assessment year 1960-81 and subsequent years.
 18

 70. As part of the scheme of simplification of company taxation, I propose to
combine in the income tax and super tax rates of companies, the net incidence of the
present taxes on income, excess dividends and wealth. For purposes of advance payment
of tax by companies under Section 18-A of the income Tax Act, I propose a rate of 20
per cent, for income tax and 25 per cent for super tax, that is to say, a total of 45 per
cent. This rate will secure the same revenue as is at present derived from the taxes on
the wealth and profits of companies and I propose, therefore, to abolish the Wealth
Tax on companies and the Excess Dividends Tax.
 71. The changes in company taxation will not effect the divisible pool of
income tax in the coming year. In 1960-61 a part of the tax now accruing to the pooI
may not, for technical reasons, be treated as divisible. It is Government’s intention to
secure that, until the matter has been examined by the next Finance Commission, the
State Governments continue to receive as their share of income tax about the same
amount which they would have received had this change not been made.
 72. Foreign companies which declare dividends outside India will, of course,
not be subject to the scheme I have described. However, some adjustment is necessary
in the rates applicable to them on account of the withdrawal of the Wealth Tax on
companies. The present rate applicable to such companies is 61.5 per cent and I
propose to raise it to 63 per cent with effect from 1960-61.
 73. Before leaving the subject of company taxation, I should like to mention
one further change. While ordinary bonus issues are subject to tax, bonus issues which
are made out of share premium accounts are not now taxed. With effect from 1960-61,
I propose to subject these issues also to taxation like other bonus issues.
 74. A few more changes in the income Tax Act will be necessary as a corollary
to the new scheme. I will not, however, tire the House with a detailed description of
these changes. They are incorporated in the Finance Bill and are explained in the
Memorandum on the Bill circulated with the Budget papers.
 75. The Finance Bill also contains some other minor changes. These have no
significant effect on revenue and I would like to mention to the House only two of
them; one of them withdraws the concessions now available to incomes earned abroad
but not remitted to India upto a limit of Rs.4,500 and the other provides for certain
allowances to be given in pursuance of the agreement entered into with an oil company
for the exploration of oil in the West Bengal area.
NET EFFECT OF PROPOSALS
 76. I would now summarise the net effect of the taxation proposals. The
changes in the Union excise duties, excluding the shares that accrue to the States,
will yield Rs.18.08 crores. The changes in Customs duties will bring in Rs.2.77
crores and the increase in the Wealth Tax Rs.2.5 crores, a total of Rs.23.35 crores.
This will reduce the deficit an revenue account from Rs.81.67 crores to Rs.58.32
 19

crores, about the same amount as in the current year which I propose to leave
uncovered. The overall budgetary deficit will also be reduced from Rs.245 crores to
Rs.222 crores.
CONCLUSION
 77. The annual budget is now something more than a simple account of
Government’s housekeeping. Each budget marks a stage in the country’s continuous
development and has to be judged by the contribution it makes to this development. In
a sense therefore, the stage that has been reached in the implementation of the Plan
conditions this budget. So far as the Plan is concerned, I think it is accepted by every
one that subject to such minor adjustments as may be necessary and were made at the
time of the recent reappraisal by the National Development Council, we have to go
forward with the Plan. For me, as for my predecessors in this place this has been the
major factor round which the budget has to be built. In doing so, I have kept
continuously in mind the main considerations necessary for the successful
implementation of the Plan. If I may repeat them, these are the maximum mobilisation
of resources by taxation and borrowing, firm control over the growth of non-
development expenditure and minimum recourse to borrowing from the central bank
for the finance required for development. In regard to the raising of resources, although
the quantum of additional taxation next year is moderate compared to what was raised
in the first two years of the Plan, it is still substantial. As regards the growth of
expenditure, Hon’ble Members will notice that the next year’s budget provides for a
substantial drop in Defence expenditure and that the bulk of the increase in Civil
expenditure is on account of larger provision for development. We are doing our best
to see that there is no avoidable increase in non-development expenditure and in the
Finance Ministry and in the Planning Commission, we have machinery for securing
economies in non-Plan and Plan expenditure. An account of the work of the economy
units is given to Parliament from time to time and I need not dilate on it here. I would,
however, assure the House that I am fully conscious of the imperative need for tightening
control over such expenditure and it is our constant endeavour to achieve the utmost
economy without sacrifice of efficiency or output. As regards borrowing from the
central bank, although the overall budgetary deficit for the coming year is smaller
than in the current year and very much smaller than the deficit in 1957-58, it is still
somewhat higher than I myself would have wished and Government had in mind some
months ago. The House will appreciate that to a large extent this deficit reflects the
outlay on the Plan-which cannot be cut down without accentuating unemployment
and leading to stagnation. Nevertheless, I may assure the House that Government do
not take a complacent view of the situation and it is my intention to see how far the
deficit could be reduced by appropriate measures during the course of the year.
 78. In recent months, we have been passing through a difficult period and as
the Prime Minister summed it up so aptly when he presented the budget last year, our
 20

crisis is a crisis of development, a crisis of resources. I feel we have passed through
the most difficult phase and that there is no reason for taking a pessimistic view of the
situation. Many of the major development schemes will be completed in the course of
the remaining period of the Plan and will start yielding results. The country’s foreign
exchange difficulties are being steadily surmounted and the overall budgetary deficits
have started moving down significantly. Although the price situation is still a matter
of some concern, there is no reason to doubt the inherent soundness of the country’s
economy and its ability to weather the current difficulties. These difficulties are purely
transitional and should act as a spur to greater effort on the part of the community.
There can, in any case, be no question of looking back or of slowing down the country’s
economic development. This would require greater production, greater saving and
more restraint in consumption - in other words, greater efforts and more sacrifices by
the community for ensuring a better future for the country. I am certain that these
efforts and sacrifices would be forthcoming and that we could go forward with a stout
heart and with confidence in our high destiny.
 (February 28, 1959)




 21

