 PART B
DIRECT TAXES
 62. I shall now address myself to the task of formulating proposals for covering
the deficit to the extent feasible.
 63. The proposals, in so far as direct taxes are concerned, which I am presenting
before you, are designed to increase corporate savings, channel more funds into
productive investment, accelerate the pace of industrial growth and, at the same time,
strengthen the redistributive role that direct taxes, to my mind, must be made to play.
 64. In so far as indirect taxes are concerned, I have endeavoured to ensure
that my proposals do not impinge on the necessities of life. There, I have sought to
raise resources, in the main, from the less essential or luxury items, while giving relief
to some deserving sectors, and simplifying and rationalising the central excise tariff
structure generally.
 65. In fulfilment of an assurance in the Janata Party manifesto, I propose to
provide that no income-tax shall be payable by individuals and Hindu undivided families
whose taxable incomes does not exceed Rs.10,000. In order, however, to keep the
sacrifice of revenue to the minimum, the nil rate slab of income is being retained at
Rs.8, 000. Hence, where the taxable income exceeds Rs.10, 000, the excess over Rs.8,
000 will be charged to tax as at present subject to the grant of marginal relief in cases
where the taxable income exceeds Rs.10,000 by a small margin.
 66. I do not propose to make any change in the basic rates of income-tax.
However, in view of the imperative need to raise additional resources, I propose to
increase the rate of surcharge on income-tax in the case of all categories of taxpayers,
except companies, from 10 per cent to 15 per cent. With the increase in the rate of
surcharge, the maximum marginal rate of personal income-tax will now be 69 per
cent. , as against 66 per cent at present.
 67. It is my feeling that wealth-tax rates were reduced in the Budget of 1976
to an unjustifiable extent. If the essential objective of a wealth-tax is to be achieved,
it must be so devised that while it does not become oppressive and counter-productive,
it does have an effect on excessive accumulation of wealth in individual hands. In
 14

this view of the matter, I propose to raise the rates of wealth-tax. The existing rate
of half per cent will continue unchanged on the first Rs.2.5 lakhs of net wealth, but
for the higher slabs there will be an increase of half a per cent over the existing
rates, while in the highest slab of over Rs.15 lakhs, the new rate will be three and a
half per cent, that is, an increase of one per cent over the existing rate. There will be
corresponding changes in the rates applicable to Hindu undivided families having
one or more members with net wealth exceeding Rs.1 lakh. The new rate schedule
will come into force from the current assessment year and will thus supersede the
changes made last year in the rate schedule. These changes win result in an additional
revenue of about Rs.10 crores in 1977-78.
 68. As Hon’ble Members are aware, Government have already dispensed with
the Compulsory Deposit Scheme in its application to additional dearness allowance as
from 6th May, 1977. Having regard, however, to the state of the economy and the
inflationary pressures that exist, I propose to continue the Compulsory Deposit Scheme
for income-tax Payers for another two years.
 69. With a view to stimulating industrial development and economic growth,
I consider it desirable to widen the scope of the scheme of investment allowance
introduced last year. That scheme has unfortunately not laid down any well-defined
and clear criteria for selecting industries to which the benefit of the concession was to
be extended. This made it difficult to explain to those claiming eligibility why some
industries had been given the benefit, while it was denied to others. Since there is a
need for encouraging generation of internal resources for financing investment, I
consider it best to extend the scope of investment allowance to all industries except
those which are engaged in the manufacture of specified low priority items such as
Cigarettes, cosmetics and alcoholic beverages. This measure will be of great benefit
to the economy.
 70. In order to promote scientific and technological self-reliance, I propose
to provide an incentive to the users of technical know-how developed in our country.
It is accordingly proposed to grant investment allowance at the higher rate of 35 per
cent on machinery and plant installed for the manufacture of any article made in
accordance with know-how developed in Government laboratories, public sector
companies and universities.
 71. From the point of view of maximising expansion of industry, I can see
little merit in compelling closely-held industrial companies to distribute a high
percentage of their net profits as dividends. I propose, therefore, to exempt such
companies from the requirement of compulsory distribution of dividends. I do not
propose to extend this relief to an other kinds of closely-held companies.
 72. It is my belief that the present structure of capital gains taxation stands in
the way of adequate mobility of investible resources, and perpetuates investment in
 15

low priority assets. In this view, I am proposing certain changes in our existing scheme
of capital gains taxation.
 (a) At present capital gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset held by
a taxpayer for a period exceeding 60 months alone are entitled to concessional tax
treatment. With a view to improving mobility, I propose to reduce the holding period
to 36 months.
 (b) In respect of capital assets acquired prior to the 1st January, 1954, a
taxpayer has the option of adopting the fair market value of the asset on 1st January,
1,954 in place of the actual cost of acquisition. Determination of the fair market value
of a capital asset with reference to a date more than 23 years ago presents practical
difficulties. Moreover, capital gain arising from the transfer of assets held over, a
length of time is, in a world of rapid and continuing inflation, to a great extent illusory
in nature. On the whole. therefore, it seems to me desirable to advance the notional
date by 10 years, namely, to 1st of January, 1964.
 (c) Capital gains tax is payable on the sale of a residential house. The existing
law provides that if another residential house is either purchased or constructed within
a. specified time, then the capital gains can be wholly or partially exempted depending
upon the amount of capital gains utilised on the new residential house. Similar
concessions are not available in respect of capital gains arising from sale of assets,
such as jewellery or shares. I see no reason for drawing such a distinction. Accordingly,
I propose to exempt the capital gains from tax, if the sale proceeds of any asset are
reinvested within six months in shares, bank deposits, units of the Unit Trust or other
preferred assets. In order to prevent abuse of this concession, it is required that the
assets in which the sale proceeds have been reinvested are held for a period of not less
than three years.
 73. Sickness among industrial undertakings is a matter of grave national
concern. Closure of any sizeable manufacturing unit in any industry entails social
costs in terms of loss of production and, employment, and also waste of valuable
capital assets. Experience has shown that taking over of such units by Government is
not always the most satisfactory or the most economical solution. A more effective
course would be to facilitate the voluntary amalgamation of sick industrial units with
sound ones by providing certain incentives and by removing impediments in the way
of such amalgamation. It is accordingly proposed to provide that where an amalgamation
is accepted by the Central Government to be in public interest, the accumulated losses
and unabsorbed depreciation of the amalgamating company will be allowed to be
carried forward and set off in the hands of the amalgamated company.
 74. With a view to encouraging companies to involve themselves in the work
of rural welfare and uplift, I propose to provide that expenditure incurred by them on
approved programmes of rural development will be allowed to be deducted in computing
their taxable profits.
 16

 75. In order to give a direct stimulus for the setting up of small-scale industrial
undertakings in rural areas, I intend to accord preferential tax treatment to industries
which are set up in such areas, and which begin their manufacturing activity after 30th
June, 1977. Such industrial undertakings will be entitled to a deduction in the
computation of their taxable profits of an amount equal to 20 per cent of the profits.
The concession will be available for each of the ten years commencing from the year
in which the undertaking begins its manufacturing activities.
 76. Under a provision made last year, companies were given the option, instead
of paying 5 per cent surcharge on income-tax, to deposit an equivalent amount with
the Industrial Development Bank of India for a period of five years. I propose to
withdraw this option. The Budget accordingly takes credit for an additional tax receipt
of Rs.56 crores on this account.
 77. The amount of donations for charitable purposes qualifying for tax
exemption is limited to 10 per cent of the gross total income of the donor, subject
further to a monetary ceiling of Rs.2 lakhs. It is felt that this ceiling is unduly restrictive
and only discourages more liberal donations to deserving charities. I propose
accordingly that the monetary ceiling be raised from Rs.2 lakhs to Rs.5 lakhs.
 78. Fifty per cent of the remuneration received by Indian technicians from a
foreign Government or a foreign enterprise for services rendered outside India is
exempt from income-tax. We cannot justifiably deny this concession when the employer
happens to be an Indian concern. I propose accordingly to enlarge the scope of this
concession to cover Indian technicians employed by Indian concerns in any branch or
office outside India.
 79. Deduction of tax from small dividends has been a source of considerable
hardship to a large number of small investors in joint stock companies. With a view to
avoiding inconvenience to such investors, and in particular to investors from rural
areas, the requirement of deduction of tax at source from dividends will be waived in
cases where the dividend paid does not exceed Rs.250.
 80. Under a provision made by the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975,
charitable or religious trusts and institutions are required to invest their funds in certain
forms and modes specified in the Income-tax Act. Any trust or institution which does
not conform to the prescribed pattern of investment in any accounting year commencing
on or after 1st April, 1978, would lose exemption from income-tax. Having regard to
practical difficulties involved and to ensure a more orderly change-over in their pattern
of investment in line with the new provisions, the date for change-over to the new
investment pattern is proposed to be extended by three years, i.e., from Ist Apirl, 1978
to 1st April, 1981.
 81. I have taken credit for increasing the surcharge on income-tax and
increasing the rates of wealth-tax. The loss of revenue involved in exempting
 17

individuals, Hindu undivided families, etc. with an annual income up to Rs.10, 000
has also been taken note of. The overall effect of all the direct tax proposals would be
a gain to the Centre’s revenue of Rs.92 crores in the current year.
 82. As Hon’ble Members are aware, the direct taxes statutes have become
increasingly complicated and incomprehensible over the years. It is, therefore, necessary
to take immediate action for the simplification and rationalisation of these laws with
a view to making them readily intelligible to the taxpayers, reducing litigation, and,
thus, subserving the interest of the national economy. It is also necessary to examine
ways and means of improving the administration of these laws and expediting
assessment, appellate and other proceedings under these laws. It has., therefore, been
decided to appoint a Committee of eminent experts to make recommendations for the
simplification and rationalisation of the direct tax laws. It is my intention to ask the
Committee to submit its report before the end of the year.
INDIRECT TAXES
 83. Now I come to my proposals with regard to Indirect taxes. My proposals
concerning central excise fall into three categories, the first relates to proposals for
raising additional resources, the second to reduction or abolition of excise duties, and
the last set of proposals seeks to rationalise and simplify the duty structure.
 84. A 10 per cent excise duty Is proposed to be levied on the following five
items; (i) hand tools, and small tools not already excisable, (ii) weighing machines
and weigh bridges, (iii) watches clocks and time-pieces, (iv) electric light fittings and
(v) polishes for footwear, metals, cars, etc. It is also proposed to levy an excise duty
of 12 per cent on acetylene gas. Small scale manufacturers of hand tools and small
tools, electric light fittings and polishes, will, however, be exempted in respect of
their production up to Rs.1 lakh. These levies are expected to yield a revenue of Rs.11
crores in a year.
 85. As Hon’ble Members are aware, in 1975, as an experimental measure, a
1 per cent general excise duty was levied on commodities which did not attract excise
duties under any specific heads. The experiment has succeeded in the sense that without
imposing any undue burden or harassment we were able to collect an appreciable sum
of money, namely Rs.37 crores. When we stand in need of additional resources, it
seems eminently suitable to raise this rate to 2 per cent. In order to minimise the
cascading effect, a set off will be given where these goods go into the manufacture of
other goods that are themselves excisable.
 86. Realising that under this excise head fall a large number of small units
producing a variety of goods I have provided that no duty will be levied on any unit
whose annual turn over does not exceed Rs.30 lakhs. This will replace the existing
exemption based on the number of workers. I am. also exempting all non-power operated
units from this levy.
 18

 87. Further, small newspapers have already been exempted from this levy. It
is now proposed to extend this exemption to medium newspapers also. The big
newspapers will continue to pay duty at the existing rate of 1 per cent.
 88. The net additional yield from this group of proposals is expected to be of
the order of Rs.30 crores In a year.
 89. I now come to the hardy annual, namely tobacco products. At present the
rate of ad valorem duty on cigarettes increases as the value of cigarettes goes Up. The
progression in the existing, rates is now proposed to be raised. In regard to branded
biris it is proposed to raise the existing duty of rupee one per thousand to rupees two
per thousand. These levies are estimated to yield an additional revenue of Rs.45 crores
in a year.
 90. The present system of taxing cinematograph films is based primarily on
the length and the nature of the film, and the number of prints. I intend changing the
basis and adopting the value criterion, the revised duty being 10 per cent ad valorem.
This is a much fairer criterion.
 91. The present specific rates of duty on pigments, paints, enamels, varnishes
etc. are proposed to be replaced by ad valorem rates. These are being so adjusted that
the duty on the high cost items such as oil-bound paints, enamels, plastic emulsions
and varnishes will increase by about 5 per cent generally, while that on the cheaper
items like blacks and dry distemper will remain more or less unchanged. These changes
are estimated to yield Rs.4.8 crores in a year.
 92. The excise duty on motor vehicles is also being raised. The rate of duty
on motor cars is to go up by 21/2 per cent to 171/2 per cent. Similarly, the rate of duty
on two-wheeler and three-wheeler motor vehicles is proposed to be raised from 9 per
cent to 121/2 per cent. Since I propose simultaneously to exempt from excise duty
tyres, tubes and batteries supplied as original equipment, the net increase in duty for
the two and three wheelers will be about 2A per cent. These changes will yield a net
revenue of Rs.5.1 crores annually.
 93. I come now to proposals for reduction or abolition of excise duties. The
first industry to benefit is the handloom. At present only cotton yarn supplied in
straight reel hanks is exempt from excise duty. It is now proposed to exempt also
cotton yarn in cross reel hanks up to 20s counts. It is also proposed to exempt cotton
yarn of higher counts in cross reel hanks to the extent of 30 paise per kilogram.
Further I propose to extend similar concessions in respect of viscose spun yarn, because
the handloom sector is now consuming substantial quantities of that yarn.
 94. The next beneficiary is the powerloom sector. I propose to exempt it from
the existing compounded excise levy. This will free about 80,000 powerloom licensees
from excise control.
 19

 95. Handloom and powerloom fabrics have to pay excise duty when they are
subjected to various finishing processes, but an exemption is given if bleaching, dyeing
and printing is done without the aid of power. It is now proposed to extend this
concession to all other types of processing such as stentering and mercerising done
without the aid of power.
 96. The yarn crimping industry is today suffering from excess capacity and
the difference in price between crimped yarn and base yarn cannot sustain the present
rate of duty. It is, therefore, proposed to reduce the duty on crimped yarn from Rs.10
per kilogram to Rs.5 per kilogram.
 97. I propose to reduce the duty on power driven pumps used for pumping
water from 10 per cent to 5 per cent and to exempt power tillers from the general
excise levy. Both these concessions will be of particular value to small farmers.
 98. Small paper mills have been passing through difficult times - a few of
them have even closed down. I, therefore, propose to reduce the duty leviable on
paper produced by these mills, the relief varying on a graded basis from 75 per cent
to 50 per cent of the excise duty leviable, dependent upon the installed capacity of the
mill. This concession will be subject to the use of non-conventional raw materials and
waste paper to the extent of at. least 50 per cent. Even larger paper mills if they use
non-conventional raw materials to the extent of at least 50 per cent will get a duty
relief of 33 113 per cent of the excise duty leviable. This concession is designed to
conserve our fast depleting timber resources.
 99. In the match industry, small cottage units are finding it difficult to
compete successfully with the bigger units. To help such of these units as are
members of registered cooperative societies or are certified as such by the Khadi
and Village Industries Commission, I propose to double the existing concession
of 55 paise for a gross of match boxes. I need hardly say that these units have a
large employment potential.
 100. Mini steel plants are also in difficulties. Their position could be improved
if they were provided with fresh melting scrap from the main steel plants without
payment of excise duty. I, therefore, propose to exempt from excise duty the identifiable
types of fresh melting scrap cleared from the main steel plants as raw material for the
mini steel plants.
 101. The revenue from electric insulating tapes and slotted angles is low and
further, has to be collected from a number of small producers. I, therefore, propose to
delete these articles from the list of specific items in the Central Excise Tariff.
 102. The production of boiled sweets, toffees, candies, etc. has been going
down. Sugar, which is a basic raw material, is already subjected to a high excise duty
as also are packaging paper and containers used in the confectionery industry. I,
 20

therefore, propose to delete these confectionery articles also from the list of specific
items in the Central Excise Tariff.
 103. Electronics is one of our growing and promising industries, and offers
great scope for development in the small-scale sector. The various concessions that
are proposed here are designed to help the growth of that sector. At present the duty
on electronic items is on a varying basis, some being specific and others ad valorem.
It is now proposed to make the basis uniformly ad valorem. The large manufacturers
producing radios and transistor sets, tape recorders, tape recorder-cum- radios, stereos
and hi-fi musical systems will. pay duty varying from 15 per cent. to 35 per cent. ad
valorem, depending on the item and the ex-factory price. It is proposed to give small
manufacturers a uniform concession of 15 per cent. ad valorem in the rate of duty, that
is to say, the corresponding rates of duty that they will pay will vary from nil to 20 per
cent. ad valorem.
 104. Experience has shown that a judiciously adjusted excise structure acts
as a powerful incentive to manufacturers of electronic goods to reduce their prices.
We propose to continue with this experiment further. In the case of T.V, sets the 5
per cent concessional rate of excise duty will henceforth be available only where the
ex-factory price of a T.V. set with a screen exceeding 36 centimeters is Rs.1600 or
less., instead of the existing limit of Rs.1800. In the case of tape recorders, there will
be a concessinal rate if the ex-factory price does not exceed Rs.500. For electronic
calculators too, there will be a concessional rate for calculators if the ex-factory
price does not exceed Re. 175.
 105. 1 shall now expound my proposals concerning rationalisation. We are at
present collecting excise duty on woollen yarn from a number of small spinners. This
has led to evasion and other malpractices. It is, therefore, proposed to replace the
excise duty leviable on woollen yarn by an increase in the customs duty at the stage
of import of raw wool, waste wool and rage. As regards wool tops also, with a view
to minimising evasion, it is proposed to reduce the present rate of excise duty of Rs.10
per kg. to Rs.5 per kg and to make good the loss by increasing the import duty on raw
wool suitably. Both these measures should result in making fabrics using indigenous
wool cheaper.
 106. Most steel re-rollers produce bare, rods, angles, etc. which attract an excise
duty of Ra.130 per tonne in. addition to the duty already paid m ingots, it is proposed
to shift this duty of Rs.130 per tonne from the re-rollers to the ingot manufacturers,
namely, the main steel plants or the mini steel plants.
 107. The existing scheme of excise duty m cotton yarn is based m a slab system
where several counts are grouped together, and provides for sharp increases in the
rates of duty when the count of yarn increases from one slab to another. This duty
structure encourages underspinning of cotton in order to avoid payment of duty at the
higher rate and leads to wasteful use of cotton. Evasion too is not easy to check. To
 21

remove these defects, a new schedule of rates has been proposed where the duty rises
gradually with each unit increase in the count of yarn. The new rates include a duty of
half a paise per count to enable Government to recoup the loss incurred by exempting
powerlooms and hand processors from the excise duty, to which I have referred earlier.
As a further measure of rationalisation, viscose spun yarn is proposed to be subjected
to the same rates of excise duty as cotton yarn.
 108. Last year, a system of ad valorem rates for cotton fabrics was introduced.
The rates were, however, dependent on the count of the yam used in the fabric. To
rationalise the structure, I propose to adopt the ad valorem system irrespective of the
count of the yarn and with a high degree of progression built into it. The new duty
structure has been so devised as to yield approximately the same revenue from cotton
fabrics and yarn as is collected at present from these items taken together.
 109. As regards the cloth produced by powerlooms. It will be exempt if it is
sold grey or is processed by hand processors, but if it is processed by independent
power-operated processors, the rate of duty will be 50 per cent. of the composite yarn
and fabric rate paid by the mill fabrics.
 110. A major reform which is proposed to be introduced relates to the
nomenclature and classification of textile yarns and fabrics. Henceforth, yarn or
fabric would ordinarily be classified on the basis of the fibre which predominates by
weight. The new system will be much simpler and will remove many working
difficulties. Further, the blending of polyester fibre up to one-sixth of the total fibre
content will not change the classification of the yarn. This should enable the textile
industry to use more polyester fibre without attracting higher duty on the yam
produced, and would be in furtherance of a multi-fibre policy which the Government
is in the process of evolving.
 111. Pursuant to the Government’s acceptance of the recommendation of the
Sixth Finance Commission, from 1976-77 onwards, auxiliary duties of excise have
become shareable with the States in the same way as basic duties of excise. Thus, the
justification for levying auxiliary duties separately has now disappeared. In order to
simplify the structure and to eliminate unnecessary calculations, I have decided to
merge the auxiliary duties with the basic duties of excise.
 112. I have also carried out a number of minor modifications in the Central
Excise Tariff, which 1 do not propose to detail here. Full details of these changes are,
of course, given in the Budget documents.
 113. The total of the additional central excise levies is estimated to yield
Rs.106.3 crores in a year. The total concessions given will mean a sacrifice of Rs.15.7
crores in a year. The net yearly increase in central excise levies is thus estimated at
Rs.90.6 crores. However, because of the transfer of the duty on woollen yarn and
wool tops to imports, there will be a transfer of Rs.17 crores from Central Excise head
 22

to Customs head, thus giving a net increase of Rs.73.6 crores under the Central Excise
head. Of this, the additional revenue accruing to the Centre in a year will be Rs.53.8
crores, while the States’ share will be Rs.19.8 crores.
 114. Finally, I come to customs duties in respect of which I have to submit
only a few proposals. indigenous production of watches does not fully satisfy the
domestic demand. As a result, considerable quantities of foreign watches are known
to be smuggled into the country. Government have accordingly decided to make good
the deficiency still remaining by allowing the import of watches through Hindustan
Machine Tools Ltd. In order that the indigenously manufactured watches and imported
watches are available to the public at reasonable prices I am reducing the import duty
on watch parts and watches from 120 per cent. to 50 per cent. ad valorem.
 115. I am proposing also to reduce the import duty on newsprint from 5 per
cent to 21 per cent ad valorem.
 116. I would now make certain proposals designed to stimulate industrial growth
and to enhance the competitiveness of our industry. In order to introduce a measure of
competition, it is proposed to allow the import of certain selected items of capital
goods without prior scrutiny from the indigenous angle. At the same time, in order to
enable the Indian capital goods industry to meet foreign competition more effectively,
I propose to bring down the rate of import duty on copper wire bars used for the
manufacture of certain larger sized electrical motors, generators and transformers from
the existing level of 45 per cent plus Rs.5,600 per tonne to 40 per cent ad valorem.
Similarly,, the rate of duty on cold rolled non- grain- oriented sheets, alloy steel, tool
steel, special steel, and high carbon steel is also proposed to be brought down from 75
per cent to 40 per cent. Further, stainless steel plates, sheets and strips of 16 gauge and
thicker which are used in the manufacture of capital goods and which are to-day
charged to 120 per cent or 320 per cent duty depending on the gauge, are proposed in
future to be charged to 40 per cent duty only. Utensil grade stainless steel of 22 gauge
and thinner, which today attracts a duty of 320 per cent, will be charged to import duty
at 120 per cent. Varying rates of duty are proposed to be fixed for the intervening
gauges, taking into account the possibility of re-rolling imported products. It is estimated
that the reduction in duties on these copper and steel items will mean a revenue
sacrifice of the order of Rs.36.25 crores at the existing level of imports.
 117. The effect of the increase in Customs duties proposed by me will be an
additional revenue of Rs.15.5 crores in a year. The reliefs total Rs.37.7 crores in a
year thus resulting in a net reduction of Rs.22.2 crores. But taking into account the
transfer of Rs.17 crores from the Central Excise head to the Customs head, the overall
effect of the budget proposal on Customs revenue will be a reduction of Rs.5.2 crores
in a year.
 118. Taking Union Excise duties and Customs duties together, the net yield for
 23

the Centre in a year will be Rs.48.6 crores. The yield during the remaining part of the
current financial year will be Rs.38. 2 crores.
 119. My proposals will yield, in all, Rs.130 crores for the Centre in the current
year. The deficit of Rs.202 crores which I mentioned earlier will, thus. be reduced to
Rs.72 crores. This is a relatively small amount and is unlikely to have any inflationary
effect.
CONCLUSION
 120. With this I have come to the end of my labours. My aim in this budget is
to stimulate the economy into achieving a higher rate of growth of output and
employment, and simultaneously to ensure that the fruits of economic progress are as
widespread as possible. The emphasis on investment in agriculture, small and village
industries and rural infrastructure is designed to achieve these objectives. My tax
proposals seek-to enlarge the pool of national savings while strengthening the role of
taxation in reducing disparities of income and wealth. I have taken special care to
widen opportunities for the small man - be he a farmer, an artisan or a technocrat. It
would be futile to pretend that we can achieve at one stroke the full utilization of the
latent energies represented by our vast human resources. But a beginning has to be
made. I venture to think that this Budget marks such a beginning.
 121. My party has emphasised liberty. But liberty does not mean freedom to
starve and freedom to feel unwanted. Large-scale poverty and unemployment degrade
those who have to suffer them, and debase those who tolerate them. We owe it to
ourselves to see that these twin scourges are eradicated as quickly as possible. We
have a long and a difficult road ahead of us. But there can be no doubt about our
commitment to our goals and ideals. I believe we are on the right course and this
Budget represents the first step, however small, in that direction.
 (June 17, 1977)




 24

