 PART B
 89. Sir, I now present my tax proposals.
 90. There has been much talk of a tough budget. The temptation to raise taxes
in the given situation was indeed great. But I recognise that direct tax policy must
impart stability and confidence both to individuals and corporates. Therefore, any
uncertainty in this regard must be ended. Tax rates introduced last year are moderate
enough. I do not propose to introduce any changes in the rate structure either for
individual or corporate taxes. I do hope that long-term stability in tax structure
would create virtuous circles of increased productivity, voluntary compliance and
enhance our tax widening efforts. In fact, I am going to announce a couple of
concessions. Considering the difficulties experienced by the tax payers at the marginal
level, the level for tax exemption is being raised from the existing limit of Rs.40,000
to Rs.50,000.
 91. Salary earners having income upto Rs.1 lakh will be further pleased to
know that I propose to raise the ceiling of standard deduction in their case from
Rs.20,000 to Rs.25,000. Their pleasure, I hope, will be happily shared by those
salary earners whose income is more than Rs.5 lakhs. They will henceforth not be
entitled to this deduction. For salary earners having income between Rs.1 lakh and
Rs.5 lakhs, no change is proposed in the existing position. I also propose to enhance
the ceiling of tax-free reimbursement of medical expenses from Rs.10,000 to
Rs.15,000.
 92. In a country of our size, it is a matter of great anxiety that the total number
of assessees constitutes less than 1.25% of our population. The scope for tax widening
remains the single most formidable challenge in the area of direct taxes. It is well
accepted tenet of taxation policy that moderate rates of taxes only make sense if the

 18
net is wide and the scope of evasion progressively minimised. Towards this objective,
I propose to take some important initiatives. Last year, a scheme was introduced to
cover 12 important cities where if you fulfil two of the four criteria, namely, possession
of a house, subscription to a telephone, spending on foreign travel and possession of
a motor vehicle, you would be obliged to file an income-tax return. This scheme had
several lacunae which I propose to remove. In the first instance, the scheme is being
extended now to cover 23 more cities in India taking the total coverage to 35 cities.
The net itself is being enlarged to include two additional criteria, namely, holding a
credit card and membership of expensive clubs, taking the total parameters to six.
Finally, the matching of two out of four parameters apart from being an
administratively onerous task provided an escape route to many potential assessees.
I believe that if any one fulfils one of the six criteria, it would be reasonable to ask
the individual to file his income-tax return. It could thereafter be determined whether
he is liable for payment of taxes or not. This revised “One-by-Six”, as the scheme
would now be known, is a significant initiative in our tax widening efforts and it is
my intention to raise the total number of individuals filing their income-tax returns
by at least 50 percent during a full fiscal year.
 93. Coupled with tax widening, tax evasion continues to be a serious handicap.
While efforts at enforcement would be strengthened, I propose to undertake a new
initiative in making it obligatory for assessees to quote their PAN or GIR number
mandatorily in respect of certain high value transactions. These transactions
would be :-
 * Purchase & Sale of immovable property
 * Purchase & Sale of motor vehicles
 * Transaction in shares exceeding Rs.50,000
 * Opening of new bank accounts
 * Fixed deposits of more than Rs.50,000
 * Applications for allotment of telephone connection
 * Payment to hotels exceeding Rs.25,000/-.
With increased usage of computerisation, this data will be fully utilised for increasing
the tax-base and for preventing the leakage of revenue.
 94. We must recognise that the cumbersome nature of our income tax forms
coupled with complex procedures is a serious deterrent to an honest individual in
becoming an assessee. I, therefore, propose to introduce, for the first time, a simple
one page taxpayer-friendly return form to be hereinafter called, ‘SARAL’, applicable
to all non-corporate taxpayers. SARAL can be filled up easily without the aid of
Chartered Accountants or Tax Advisors. The ‘SARAL’, I hope, would become popular
enough, through voluntary compliance and the assistance of NGOs, which I propose
to muster, along with mobile vans for important cities, can be widely distributed and
collected easily on spot. This will, apart from contributing to our tax widening effort,
also make an important psychological difference in the mindset of potential tax
assessees.
 95. Litigation has been the bane of both direct and indirect taxes. A lot of
energy of the Revenue Department is being frittered in pursuing large number of
litigations pending at different levels for long periods of time. Considerable revenue

 19
also gets locked up in such disputes. Declogging the system will not only incentivise
honest taxpayers, enable government to realise its reasonable dues much earlier
but coupled with administrative measures, would also make the system more user-
friendly. I, therefore, propose to introduce a new scheme called “SAMADHAN”. The
scheme would apply to both direct taxes and indirect taxes and offer waiver of interest,
penalty and immunity from prosecution on payment of arrears of direct tax at the
current rates. In respect of indirect tax, where in recent years the adjustment of
rates has been very sharp, an abatement of 50 per cent of the duty would be available
alongwith waiver of interest, penalty and immunity from prosecution.
 96. Legal measures are also being proposed to limit and expedite litigation.
These include enhanced scale of fees for filing appeals before the Appellate
Commissioner and the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, abolition of the level of Deputy
Commissioner (Appeals), provision of direct appeals to High Courts to reduce delay,
and also extension of the scope of the Authority for Advance Ruling to notified
categories of resident tax payers.
 97. Moderate rates and large concessions do not go hand in hand. I have,
therefore, carried out a review of the various concessions and exemptions under the
Income-tax Act. I find that many of them are no longer necessary and some of them
are also being used for tax avoidance. I, therefore, propose to withdraw many of
these provisions. These include exemption to the Export Import Bank of India and
exemption in respect of certain perquisites of foreigners employed in India. The
blanket exemption in respect of educational and medical institutions which is being
misused, is proposed to be withdrawn, compelling such institutions to come under
a discipline. However, safeguards are being provided to ensure that the institutions
genuinely serving the social cause in either field do not lose the existing benefits.
 98. I also propose to plug certain loopholes. Rule 5(a) of the First Schedule to
the Income-tax Act relating to computation of profit of insurance business other
than life insurance business is being amended to prevent leakage of revenue.
Similarly, section 10(23G) of that Act is being recast to serve the objective of
infrastructure financing without misuse of the concession. Under the existing
provisions, there is no mechanism to ensure that the tax free funds raised by an
infrastructure enterprise are actually used for infrastructure development within a
reasonable time and are not used for any other purpose. I propose to provide such
a mechanism.
 99. Gift-tax has been levied in India since 1958. The revenue yield from this
tax has been insignificant. Last year we collected barely Rs.9 crore. The Gift-tax Act
has also not been successful as an instrument to curb tax evasion and avoidance. I,
therefore, propose to discontinue the levy of gift- tax on gifts made after 30th
September, 1998. At the same time, to ensure that there are no leakages of income-
tax revenue through the mechanism of gifts, I propose to tax the gifts under the
Income-tax Act itself in the hands of the recipients. However, the gifts from non-
residents including NRIs through banking channels will continue to enjoy exemption
as at present.
 1 0 0 . I have already said that housing is an area which requires our utmost
attention. Therefore, I propose several incentives to encourage house-building activity.

 20
These include :-
 * Tax holiday for approved housing projects - 100 per cent deduction from
 profits for first five years and 30 per cent deduction for subsequent five
 years.
 * Increased deductions against income from house property - deduction for
 repairs and collection charges increased from 1/5th to 1/4th and deduction
 for interest on borrowed capital in case of self-occupied property increased
 from Rs.15,000 to Rs.30,000.
 * Carry-forward of losses from house property against future income under
 the same head to be allowed for 8 years.
 * Deduction equal to 50 per cent of the profits to companies engaged in
 housing projects aided by the World Bank.
 * Section 80GG in respect of deduction for rents paid is being reintroduced.
 * Exemptions to certain specified properties like commercial complexes under
 the Wealth-tax Act.
 1 0 1 . Other areas in the social sector for which new tax incentives are proposed
or the existing ones being increased include employment generation, improvement
of environment, upliftment of women, road safety, cooperatives and medical expenses
of the handicapped.
 1 0 2 . I propose to allow a new deduction to companies with a view to encourage
them to employ additional work force. An amount equal to 30 per cent of additional
wages paid to the new workmen will be allowed as a deduction against profits, subject
to certain conditions.
 1 0 3 . For improvement of environment, I propose to allow 100 percent deduction,
subject to a ceiling of Rs.5 lakhs, to undertakings engaged in the collection or
processing of biodegradable waste. I also propose to make activities which encourage
the production of bacteria induced fertilisers eligible for 100 per cent deduction
under section 35AC of the Income-tax Act. Necessary amendment in the rules will
be notified for this purpose. Similar benefit is proposed to be extended to the activities
of establishing and running of educational institutions, hospitals and medical facilities
in rural areas exclusively for women and children and also creches and schools for
the children of workers employed in factories or at project sites. I also propose
similar amendment of rules to make activities which promote road safety and traffic
awareness and prevent accidents eligible for 100 per cent deduction under section
35AC.
 1 0 4 . The promotion of sports and games in the country needs to be encouraged.
I propose setting up of National Sports Fund and further propose that donations
made to the Fund will be eligible for 100 per cent deduction.
 1 0 5 . I propose to extend 100% tax holiday granted to industrial undertakings
located in any industrially backward State or district till the year 2000. I also propose
similar extension of tax holiday to power sector upto the year 2003 and also to new
refineries set up after 1st October, 1998. I also propose to extend infrastructure
status to inland waterways and inland ports.

 21
 1 0 6 . I further propose tax holiday benefits to radio paging services and services
provided by satellite owners for telecommunication.
 1 0 7 . I also propose several measures in response to demands from business
and industry. Certain categories of business reorganisations are proposed to be
freed from any additional tax liability or loss of tax benefits keeping in view the
necessity of such reorganisation consequent on economic liberalisation. No capital
gain would be charged and the benefit of carry-forward of losses and unabsorbed
depreciation would be allowed in case of specified reorganisations. Intangible assets
are proposed to be allowed depreciation at the rate of 25 per cent. Provisions for
amortisation of preliminary expenses are proposed to be liberalised. The period of
amortisation is proposed to be reduced from 10 years to 5 years and the rate of
deduction will consequently be doubled. Stock lending is proposed to be exempted
from capital gains.
 1 0 8 . Delay in refund of excess tax collected tantamounts to denial of justice. It
is a source of constant harassment, particularly of small tax payers. I intend to
mitigate this difficulty by effecting an amendment in section 192 of the Income-tax
Act which will enable adjustment of loss from house property against salary income,
at the source itself. This, I believe, will eliminate a large number of refund claims.
 1 0 9 . In response to demands from tax payers, I propose to take further measures.
Under the existing provisions of section 44AA of the Income-tax Act, every person
carrying on business or profession is required to maintain account books, if his
income from business exceeds Rs.40,000 or his total turnover exceeds Rs.5 lakhs.
Considering the increased cost of engaging accountants, I propose to enhance these
limits to Rs.1,20,000 and Rs.10 lakhs respectively. I further propose that the penalty
leviable at the minimum rate of Rs.100 per day for failure to furnish certificates of
tax deduction or collection at source under section 203 or to deliver copies of
declarations under section 197A, shall not exceed the amount of tax deductible or
collectible, as the case may be. Presently, there is no such ceiling on the quantum of
penalty leviable which causes hardship, particularly to small businessmen.
 1 1 0 . Certain demands of the film industry have also engaged my attention and
I propose to give relief to them. Under the existing rules, if a film is released on
commercial basis at least 180 days before the end of the previous year, full
amortisation of the cost incurred on production or acquisition of distribution rights
of the film is allowed in the year of release itself whereas if the film is released later,
full amortisation is not allowed in that year. Considering that nowadays film producers
and distributors release a large number of prints simultaneously to counter the
threat of video-pirates and cable television, resulting in shorter life span for
exploitation of films, I propose to reduce the aforesaid period of 180 days to 90 days.
This will enable the film industry to quickly recoup the cost of film production and
distribution. I also propose that producers of films, who are required to furnish
information in respect of all payments over Rs.5,000 to the Income-tax Department
in any financial year would have to do so now only in respect of payments over
Rs.25,000. I hope these measures would inspire the film industry to make better
and healthier films.
 1 1 1 . A controversy has arisen recently regarding the deductibility of payments
by way of extortion money. To set the controversy at rest, I propose to explicitly

 22
provide retrospectively since the inception of Income-tax Act, 1961 that any money
paid by way of extortion will not qualify for deduction as a business expense. As
further rationalisation measure, I propose to make certain amendments with regard
to block assessment procedure and treatment of MODVAT credit in the valuation of
inventories and capital assets.
 1 1 2 . The limit of room rent in hotels for the purpose of attracting expenditure
tax is proposed to be increased from Rs.1200 to Rs.2000 per day.
 1 1 3 . Taxpayers all over the world have a sense of pride in discharging their
legitimate dues to the government and the society recognises the important
contribution they are making in enabling the State to discharge its responsibilities.
In this country, regrettably, the culture of pride by honest taxpayer and a social
recognition of his important role has yet to evolve. We must make a change in this
mindset. Towards this objective, I propose to introduce a scheme called “SAMMAN”
to demonstrate the society’s recognition of their important contribution to the national
cause. The details of the facilities and recognition to be conferred on the taxpayers
and PAN holders would be separately announced.
 1 1 4 . I hope the above measures alongwith SARAL, SAMMAN and SAMADHAN
will go a long way in making our efforts to increase the tax payers compliance a
success. But while we are doing what we can, I call upon the people of India to do
their patriotic duty by the country and honestly pay their taxes.
 1 1 5 . Before I move on to indirect tax, I would like to state that a large number of
suggestions were received from all sections of tax payers and I have got them carefully
examined. It is not practicable to acknowledge all these communications individually.
I do so now collectively and am extremely thankful to the tax payers for their valuable
suggestions.
 1 1 6 . Hon’ble Members would see from the budget documents that the figure
projected by way of revenue realisation from direct taxes is Rs.48,855 crore which is
higher than the figure indicated in the interim budget. This is after taking into
account the revenue loss of Rs.950 crore, worked out on a mechanical basis, arising
out of certain proposals for reliefs and concessions placed before the House. We
intend to make this loss up and collect the budgeted amount through improved
collection of arrears, continuation of the tax base enlargement efforts, rigorous
enforcement and tightening measures reflected in the budget proposals.
 1 1 7 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, our medium-term objective is to enhance the tax-GDP
ratio. As far as customs duties are concerned the process of restructuring has
resulted in a progressive reduction in tariffs, with a view to align these with
internationally acceptable levels, and the broadbanding of rates. These measures
have enhanced the competitveness of Indian industry.
 1 1 8 . On the excise side, until a few years ago the regime was characterised by
a multiplicity of rates and punctuated with numerous ad hoc exemptions. As a
result, the tax structure was opaque. It is the objective of the present proposals to
introduce greater transparency in the system through a significant rationalisation
of rates. The ultimate objective of this process is to move towards a Central Value-
Added Tax (VAT) system which can then be merged with a generalised VAT. It is our
intention to move in this broad direction.

 23
 1 1 9 . The domestic industry has responded favourably to the restructuring of
customs duties and has shown commendable resilience. They need to improve their
competitive efficiency to meet the challenges of global competition. But they also
have legitimate concerns which cannot be ignored. In this background, the path of
transition has to be carefully calibrated to ensure that the adjustment process for
the Indian industry is orderly without leading to serious disruption.
 1 2 0 . I have received representations from a cross section of the industry about
the regime of import duties. Many Hon. Members have also written to me expressing
their concern on the general health of the domestic industry. The demands are
diverse and asymmetrical in most cases. This is for obvious reasons. While the
users of imported raw materials and other inputs or the consumers of finished
imported goods would benefit from further reduction in import duties, the domestic
producers have made a convincing case for urgent relief to the domestic industry.
 1 2 1 . I have given my earnest consideration to these concerns and the competing
claims. I am persuaded about a clear disability that our commodity taxation inflicts
on the indigenous goods vis-a-vis the imported goods. While the former are subjected
to sales tax and other local taxes and levies, the import sector escapes them by their
very nature. In order to provide a level playing-field to the domestic industry, I propose
to impose an additional non-modvatable levy of 8% on imports which is approximately
equal to the burden of local taxes on domestic producers. This duty should not be
viewed as a protectionist measure but only as a response to a legitimate demand for
a level playing field. The new levy would not apply to crude oil, newsprint, capital
goods sector under a special tariff regime or goods which are subjected to additional
duties of excise in lieu of sales tax, gold and silver imported by passengers or other
nominated agencies and life saving drugs that are free from customs duties. The
levy would also not apply to goods which are currently exempt both from basic and
additional duties of customs. Similarly, goods imported for subsequent trading have
also been left out of its purview, since they bear the burden of Sales tax at the time
of first sale. The new levy will also not apply to inputs imported under export-promotion
schemes. In addition, there may be other sectors eligible for exemptions. These would
be examined and if considered appropriate notified separately.
 1 2 2 . The gradual reduction of import duties in the past few years has resulted
in certain distortions and anomalies. My proposals seek to correct them as far as
found feasible without causing abrupt disruption in the duty structure.
 1 2 3 . The steel industry has shown considerable resilience in the past to withstand
gradual reduction in customs duties. Last year, however, the steel industry has not
shown any appreciable growth. I propose to increase the customs duty on cold rolled
coils of iron and steel from 25% to 30%. I also propose to reduce the duty on
stainless steel melting scrap from 10% to 5% and on refractory ceramic goods from
40% to 30%. I am confident that these changes alongwith the imposition of the
special additional duty that I have proposed on the imports in general would provide
adequate relief to the steel industry.
 1 2 4 . The duty on wrought copper is being raised from 30% to 35%.
 1 2 5 . I do not intend to make any other changes in the duty structure applicable
to ferrous and non-ferrous metals.

 24
 1 2 6 . Textile intermediates like DMT, PTA, MEG attract customs duty at 25%.
However, caprolactum which is the raw material for making nylon yarn is subjected
to a higher duty of 30% . I am reducing the duty on caprolactum also to the level of
25% so that all the major textile intermediates attract the same rate of duty. The
import duty on paraxylene, an important input for synthetic fibres and yarn, is
being reduced from a total of 15% to 5%.
 1 2 7 . The decentralised sector of the textile industry generates avenues for
employment. It deserves to be encouraged by reducing cost. I propose to reduce
customs duty on apparel grade raw wool from a total of 25% to 20%. The duty on
wool waste and garnetted stock of wool is also being reduced by the same extent. I
also propose to reduce the duty on acetate and cuprammoniun filament yarn from
30% to 20%. In the same vein, machinery required for viscose filament yarn and
woollen industry is being accorded the concessional duty of 10%
 1 2 8 . The import of paper and paper board has shown phenomenal growth in
terms of quantity. In order to improve the competitiveness of the domestic producers,
I propose to increase the customs duty on paper and paper board from 20% to 30%.
 1 2 9 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, my government values the right to information. With a
view to further strengthen this right, I propose to reduce customs duty on standard
newsprint from 10% to 5%. I also propose to rationalise the duty structure by
subjecting glazed newsprint to the same rate of duty. Furthermore, I also intend to
exempt newsprint from the applicability of 8% across the board special additional
duty.
 1 3 0 . I also propose to reduce the duty on light weight coated paper weighing
upto 51 grams per square metre for printing of magazines to a total of 5%.
 1 3 1 . The customs duty on photographic chemicals is being raised from 25% to
30%. Similarly, the duty on citric acid is being increased from 30% to 40%.
 1 3 2 . I propose to reduce the customs duty on jumbo rolls of cinematographic
film from 25% to10%.
 1 3 3 . Motor vehicle parts are generally subjected to customs duty at 40%. However,
I.C. engines and parts thereof for motor vehicles attract a lower rate of 20%. I propose
to raise the customs duty thereon to 30%.
 1 3 4 . I propose to reduce the duty on industrial diamonds from 30% to 20%.
This would help the diamond cutting tool industry.
 1 3 5 . As a measure of rationalisation, I propose to reduce the duty on rayon-
grade wood pulp from 10% to 5%.
 1 3 6 . Thalassaemia is a life-threatening blood-disorder. There have been requests
for exempting maltol, an input used in the manufacture of drugs for the treatment of
this disorder. I propose to fully exempt maltol from customs duty. Hydroxy ethyl
starch and dextran are used in the manufacture of artificial plasma which is free
from import duty. I propose to reduce the burden of duty on artificial plasma by
reducing the duty on hydroxy ethyl strach and dextran from 30% to 5%. I also
propose to exempt Lamivudine, which is used for the treatment of AIDS, from customs
duty.

 25
 1 3 7 . Leather industry contributes significantly to our export effort. In order to
encourage its export, I propose to reduce the duty on specified machinery for leather
industry from 20% to 5%. This would also be the rate applicable to leather splitting
machinery. I also propose to reduce the duty on saddle trees from 30% to 10%.
 1 3 8 . Sir, the House is aware that India has joined the Information Technology
Agreement. We are committed to abolish the import duty on products of information
technology. This is not because we are bound by the ITA but because we are convinced
that spread of information technology and freer exchange of information is the key
to success and human welfare. I propose to reduce the duty on floppy disk drives,
hard disk drives and CD-ROM drives from a total of 12% to 5%. The duty on ICs of
value exceeding one thousand rupees per piece is also being reduced to 5%. I also
propose to reduce the duty on computer parts excluding PPCB from a total of 15% to
12%. The duty on PPCB is being reduced from a total of 25% to 22%. I also propose
to reduce the duty on cathode ray tubes for colour monitors for computers from a
total of 15% to 5% and on deflection components for colour monitors for computers
from a total of 25% to 5%. My proposals also include reduction in duty on telecom
software from 40% to 30%. Such software henceforth will not be subject to any
additional duty of customs.
 1 3 9 . In order to encourage the domestic telecom equipment sector, I propose to
reduce the duty on parts of such equipment to 20%.
 1 4 0 . As a measure of environmental protection, I propose to reduce the import
duty on sawn wood and certain other varieties of wood from 30% to 25%. I also
propose to reduce the duty on biopesticides, which are eco-friendly , from 30% to
5%. With the same objective, I have proposed reduction of duty on membrane
electrolysers and parts from 25% to 10%.
 1 4 1 . The duty on spodumene, which is an energy saving material, is being
reduced from 25% to 10%. On silicon, which is widely used in solar energy
applications, I propose to reduce the duty to half of the existing 10%.
 I propose to reduce the duty on -
 * Solar cells and modules from 30% to 20%
 * Button cells from 20% to 10%
 * Watch movements from 25% to 20%
 * DC micro motors from 40% to 20%
 * CD mechanism from 40% to 30%
 1 4 2 . Mr. Speaker Sir, good roads are a necessity for social and economic
development. I am sure that those of us who are privileged to afford personalised
vehicles can afford to contribute to the faster development of good roads in the
country. I propose to charge an additional tax at the rate of rupee one per litre on
petrol with immediate effect. This is expected to generate an amount of Rs.790 crore
in a year which will be used for the development of roads and entirely go towards
augmenting the corpus of the National Highways Authority of India. I propose to
extend the concessions presently available to import of equipment for construction
of National Highways to other road-construction projects also.

 26
 1 4 3 . The importers of precious yellow metal can certainly afford to contribute a
bit more to the national exchequer. I propose to increase the import duty on gold
from 220 rupees per ten grams to 250 rupees per ten grams.
 1 4 4 . The duty free allowance for baggage is Rs.6000 at present. Many countries
do not impose any such restrictions. While we may not follow them there is need to
increase the present limit to reduce delays in clearance of passengers. I propose to
increase the baggage allowance from Rs.6000 to Rs.12000 for passengers returning
to India after a stay exceeding three days. I also propose to extend free allowance of
Rs.3000 to Indian residents returning from Nepal, Bhutan, Myanmar or China by
air, after a stay exceeding three days.
 1 4 5 . There are a number of items on which it is necessary to reduce the customs
duties marginally on account of GATT binding. I do not wish to take the time of the
House in going into the details.
 1 4 6 . The government is committed to provide a tax code which is consistent
with dismantling of administered pricing mechanism of petroleum products in a
phased manner. By the year 2001, the import duty on crude has to be reduced from
the current level of 27% to not more than 5%. The import duty on down stream
products like furnace oil, LSHS, HSD oil, motor spirit and ATF has also to be reduced
to the level of 10% to 15%. In this process, we will ensure an effective protection not
exceeding 20% for downstream industry by suitable differential and calibration of
import duty structure.
 1 4 7 . I have initiated the process of implementing the decisions arising from the
dismantling of administered pricing mechanism. I propose to reduce the customs
duty on crude from a total of 27% to 22%. This is estimated to result in a revenue
loss of Rs.965 crore in a year. In order to recoup the loss, I propose to increase the
excise duty on motor spirit from 20% to 35%. I also propose to impose customs duty
on kerosene imported for parallel marketing at 32%, including special duty of 2%.
 1 4 8 . I now come to my proposals on central excise.
 1 4 9 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, the contribution of the small scale sector in the economy
cannot be over emphasised. It is a critical fast track for generating employment thus
promising support to thousands of families. The predecessor governments have been
sympathetic to the small scale sector but I am afraid they have not done enough to
encourage them so as to exploit their full potential. The fiscal incentives provided to
the small scale sector have been rather meagre for a number of years.
 1 5 0 . I have taken certain important steps in this direction. I propose to raise the
exemption limit for excise purpose from Rs.30 lakhs to Rs.50 lakhs, an increase of
about 65%. The clearances between Rs.50 lakhs to Rs.100 lakhs shall be charged to
a flat nominal rate of 5%. These proposals would result in a revenue loss of Rs.300
crore in a year. This is a small price to pay to restore to health this vital sector of our
economy.
 1 5 1 . Over the years the scheme of Modvat credit has been considerably liberalised.
However, the amount of Modvat credit availed has grown unexpectedly fast in recent
years, suggesting misuse of the Modvat credit scheme in the absence of a

 27

comprehensive computer net work for cross-checking modvatable invoices from a-
flung ranges. Until such a computer network becomes functional, and as a transitional
measure, I propose to restrict the availability of Modvat credit by 5% of the duty paid
in the case of inputs used in the manufacture of excisable goods. However, no
restriction is placed on the Modvat credit in respect of capital goods.
 1 5 2 . My proposals regarding other changes in excise duty are guided by the
overall need to rationalise the rate-structure so as to reduce the multiplicity of rates
and ensure convergence towards a mean rate of 18% ad valorem. An ideal tax structure
would be one where, barring the mean rate, there is one lower rate for items deserving
concession and a higher rate for what may be described as demerit goods. This
would minimise the oscillations in rates and call for compression of intermediate
rates.
 1 5 3 . As a first step towards a convergence to the mean rate, I propose to impose
excise duty of 8% on certain commodities. These include :
 * Packaged tea
 * Branded butter, cheese and ghee
 * Sewing machines, other than hand operated
 * Branded spices
 * Branded edible preparations when produced in factories
 * Preparations of meat and fish sold under a brand name
 * Skimmed milk powder other than for infant feeding
 * Tractors not exceeding 1800 cc
 * Spectacle lenses and frames
 * Slide fasteners
 1 5 4 . I also propose to charge excise duty on exempted articles of plastics at a
flat rate of 5% on clearances in excess of Rs.1 crore in a financial year.
 1 5 5 . In the same spirit, I propose to increase the excise duty on medical
instruments and appliances as also on pollution control equipment from 5% to 8%.
 1 5 6 . A good number of commodities are subject to excise duty at 8%. Some of
them can bear a higher duty. I , therefore, propose to increase the excise duty on
these commodities to 13%.
 1 5 7 . As a result, malt, certain types of cartons, medical furniture, sun glasses
and unrecorded audio cassettes will henceforth be subjected to duty at 13%.
 1 5 8 . As a measure of rationalisation, I propose to increase the duty on arms and
ammunition from 18% to 25%. I, however, assure the House that arms and
ammunition for the military services will continue to be exempt from excise duty.

 28

 1 5 9 . I propose to raise the duty on multi-utility vehicles from 25% to 30% and
on solid or cushion tyres also from 25% to 30%.
 1 6 0 . I also propose to raise the duty on marble tiles from Rs.30 to Rs.40 per
square metre.
 1 6 1 . My proposals also include reduction of excise duty on:
 * Effluent treatment plants from 13% to 8%
 * Diesel engine sets upto 10 HP from 13% to 8%
 * Surgical and medical examination gloves from 18% to 8%
 * Potassium iodate from 18% to 8%
 * Electronic calculators from 18% to 8%
 * Pagers from 18% to 13%
 * Cellophane from 25% to 18%.
 * PVC compound from 25% to 18%.
 1 6 2 . I propose to exempt 100% wood-free particle boards and fibre boards made
from agro-based residues from excise duty. Henceforth, cement bonded particle board,
jute particle board, rice husk board, glass fibre reinforced gypsum board, sisal fibre
board and bagasse board will also be free from excise duty. I also propose to exempt
blocks and bricks containing more than 25% fly ash, ready mixed concrete, jute
blankets and jute felt from excise duty. Henceforth, pultruded jute articles shall
also be free from excise duty.
 1 6 3 . I propose to exempt recorded audio cassettes from excise duty. I also propose
to exempt recorded video cassettes intended for television broadcasting from excise
duty. The exemption for computer software will now be broad-banded to cover all
software.
 1 6 4 . The domestic nylon industry is stagnating for various reasons. I propose to
reduce the duty on nylon filament yarn from 30% to 25%.
 1 6 5 . Finance Ministers are often criticised by the tax payers for their compulsive
habit to increase the burden of taxes. However, such complaint cannot be justified
by compulsive smokers. I propose to increase the excise duty on cigarettes by varying
degrees ranging from 6% to 11% of the specific rates.
 1 6 6 . I have no intention of being harsh on smokers all the way. Accordingly, I
propose to reduce excise duty on matches manufactured in the cottage sector by
half from Rs.0.50 to Rs.0.25 per hundred boxes. A smaller reduction is also being
made in respect of matches manufactured by other sectors.
 1 6 7 . High rates of duties are known to induce evasion and avoidance. I propose
to reduce the excise duty on alcohol-based toilet preparations from 100% to 50%. I
expect that this will improve compliance and States will get more revenue.
 1 6 8 . The Maximum Retail Price (MRP) based excise levy introduced last year in
respect of certain products has been welcomed by the industry. This scheme provides

 29

for simplification and certainty in taxation. I propose to extend this scheme to a few
more commodities, such as chocolates, malted food preparations, glazed tiles, razor
blades, radio sets, domestic electrical appliances and pan masala.
 1 6 9 . In the last budget, a number of services were added in the tax net. These
included the service rendered on transportation of goods by road. The House is
aware that it led to wide spread resistance and protests. As a result, this service tax
was virtually kept in abeyance and rightly so. I have decided to abolish the service
tax on transportation of goods by road. I have also decided to abolish the service tax
payable by outdoor caterers and pandal contractors. However, I have proposed service
tax on some new services. These are services provided by :
 * Architects
 * Interior decorators
 * Management consultants.
 * Chartered Accountants.
 * Cost Accountants.
 * Company Secretaries
 * Private security services
 * Real estate agents and real estate consultants
 * Market research agencies
 * Credit Rating Agencies
 * Underwriting agencies
 * Slaughter houses using mechanised means for large animals
We will examine how in respect of certain segments liable to Service Tax, the manner
and mode of payment could be further simplified to improve compliance. These new
service taxes will yield Rs.220 crore in a full year.
 1 7 0 . My proposals relating to customs duties are estimated to result in a net
gain of Rs.3,304 crore in one year. In case of excise duties, my proposals are estimated
to result in gain of Rs.5,009 crore.
 1 7 1 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, there can be no two opinions that we must increase the
level of voluntary compliance and our tax procedures should be simple, transparent
and hassle free. Our tax laws are yet to achieve this objective even though considerable
efforts have been made in the past.
 1 7 2 . Our laws are not in tune with the need of the times. It is imperative that
they should be rebuilt on a comprehensive basis and modified to make them truly
modern. I am conscious that it is not an easy task. But it is also not impossible. I
have decided to set up an Expert Group to recast the central excise law. It will be my
Government’s endeavour to bring a new excise law before Parliament in the next
budget session of this House.

 30

 1 7 3 . The government have also decided to set up a Settlement Commission for
settlement of certain categories of disputes relating to customs and excise duties.
The details of the scheme are contained in the Finance Bill. I also propose to set up
an authority for Advance Tax Rulings for Excise and Customs in view of the need for
foreign investors to be assured in advance of their likely indirect tax liability. A bill to
this effect will be introduced in Parliament in due course of time.
 1 7 4 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, with our courage, determination and conviction, we freed
ourselves from the British Raj more than fifty years ago. This year the nation takes
pride in celebrating the 50th year of Independence. Our trade and industry, however,
is still not free from another Raj, namely, the Inspector Raj. We are committed to put
an end to this in the shortest possible time. I am of the view that we owe it to our
taxpayers to provide a competent, efficient, sensitive and responsive tax
administration. Indeed, it is long overdue.
 1 7 5 . There is a widespread feeling that the operation and implementation of
excise laws leads to harassment of the assessees. We are earnestly desirous of bringing
about systemic changes to remedy the situation. Some of the more important
measures that are proposed, are:
 * Minimising the contact points between the officials and assessees
 * Reducing areas which require permission or approval
 * Providing respectability to orders passed by Commissioner (Appeals) and
 the Tribunal
 * Simplifying the procedure for second appeal in Modvat cases
 * Restricting factory visits by the staff
 1 7 6 . I am conscious of the fact that there is strong resentment against the
procedures and legal obligations relating to service tax. I have removed a number of
obnoxious and deterrent provisions in law. I also propose to abolish several of the
redundant and irritating central excise rules very shortly.
 1 7 7 . On the customs side, I have decided to strengthen the initiatives already
taken in the form of Fast Track Clearance Systems and the Self-Assessment System
in import clearance. Computerisation in both Customs and Central Excise
departments will be completed expeditiously so that information can be obtained
from the assessees and the importers and exporters through electronic media thereby
reducing contact between the assessees and the department.
 1 7 8 . I am introducing a new culture of time-bound action by officials of the
Customs and Central Excise department. A Citizens’ Charter is being released shortly
to lay down the citizen’s rights and the obligations cast on the customs and excise
officials.
 1 7 9 . Copies of notifications giving effect to the above changes in customs and
excise duties will be laid on the Table of the House in due course.

 31

 1 8 0 . Finally, I have something to say on behalf of my Hon’ble colleague, the
Minister of Communications. Postal service is highly employment-intensive and
salary and allowances constitute a major part of the operating expenses of the postal
department. A revision of tariff for postal services has become unavoidable. However,
in the interest of the common man and the role of the print media in a democracy,
there will be no change in the tariff for postcard and registered newspapers. However,
the rate of competition postcard is being raised from Rs.2 to Rs.3, Inland letter from
Re.1 to Rs.1.50, letter from Rs.2 to Rs.3 for every 20 gms. or part thereof and parcels
from Rs.8 to Rs.10 for every 500 gms. or part thereof. There are also certain other
changes which are explained in the Memorandum circulated along with the budget
documents. The changes would take effect from a date to be notified after the Finance
Bill is passed. The revisions proposed are estimated to yield an additional revenue of
about Rs.270 crore in a full year and about Rs.180 crore in 1998-99. Even this
modest increase, which is necessary for sustaining postal development, will only
partially meet the cost of postal services leaving an uncovered postal deficit of about
Rs.695 crore.
 1 8 1 . As a result of my tax proposals and the postal tariff revision, total
expenditure of the Central government for the year 1998-99 would be marginally
reduced to Rs.2,67,927 crore while the net revenue receipts and non-debt capital
receipts would increase to Rs.1,76,902 crore. The revenue deficit is placed at
Rs.48,068 crore which is 3% of GDP. The fiscal deficit is placed at Rs.91,025 crore
which is 5.6% of GDP. With the present state of the economy and in view of the need
for expenditure stimulus to growth, I believe further compression is not warranted
this year.
 1 8 2 . Sir, it is my firm conviction that in the days to come India will stand tall on
the world’s stage because of our commitment to democracy and the pursuit of
prosperity. I call upon you to join us to strengthen freedom and opportunity, I call
upon you to join us to build a better future for every man, woman and child. As we
move together and with discipline, the future is ours. In the words of Ramdhari
Singh Dinkar :

 ºÉäxÉÉxÉÉÒ BÉE®Éä |ÉªÉÉhÉ +É£ÉªÉ,
 £ÉÉ´ÉÉÒ <ÉÊiÉcÉºÉ iÉÖàcÉ®É cè;
 ªÉä xÉJÉiÉ +ÉàÉÉ BÉEä ¤ÉÖZÉiÉä cé,
 ºÉÉ®É +ÉÉBÉEÉ¶É iÉÖàcÉ®É cè*
 Rise O’ warrior march ahead undaunted
 You are the Creator of future history
 The stars of the dark night are fading
 The whole sky belongs to you.
 1 8 3 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, with these words, I commend the budget to this august
House.

