 PART B
 33. Sir, without taxing the patience of Honourable Members any further, I
should proceed now to the business of taxation proper. Having introduced virtually
three budgets in the past 12 months, I might well be expected to declare a holiday
from further taxation for at least one year. But I am afraid I cannot allow myself such
unique distinction. A deficit of Rs.375 crores cannot be left wholly uncovered without
danger to price stability. We have also certain commitments to the State Governments
to raise revenue on their behalf. Fiscal policy must serve the larger objectives of self-
reliance and equity. Nor should I fight shy of making a few concessions. The
introduction of a new Budget is also an opportunity for a certain amount of spring
cleaning.
 34. The Direct Taxes Enquiry Committee under the chairmanship of Shri K.N.
Wanchoo, ExChief Justice of India, submitted their Report last December. It contains
a number of valuable and far-reaching suggestions for unearthing black-money,
preventing evasion and avoidance of taxes and reducing tax arrears. Copies-of the
Report will Boon be made available to Honourable Members. It has often been said in
this House that basic changes in the tax system should be introduced by means of a
Taxation Amendment Bill rather than through the annual Finance Bill so as to give
Honourable Members more time for a detailed consideration in the light of discussion
both within and outside the House. Accordingly, I propose to bring forth a separate
legislation as early as possible to give effect to those recommendations of the Committee
which Are acceptable to the Government and which require a major change in the
present tax laws.
 35. There has been a feeling for some time in the country that a family
consisting of husband, wife and minor children which constitutes a common unit of
consumption and as such a common focal point for the incidence of indirect taxation,
is also a more appropriate and equitable basis for purposes of direct taxation subject
to certain safeguards for wives at work. The present tax treatment of Hindu undivided
families has also encouraged tax avoidance. On these two related questions, the
members of the Wanchoo Committee have made several alternative suggestions.
Government will examine these suggestions carefully and sponsor separate legislation
in due course for restructuring the Income Tax Act and the Wealth Tax Act to the
extent necessary.
 36. In the meanwhile, I propose to introduce through the Finance Bill a few
changes in the Direct Tax structure which are designed either to produce some additional
revenue in a difficult year or to give effect to such recommendations of the Wanchoo
Committee as can be easily incorporated in the present tax laws.
 9

DIRECT TAXATION
 37. On the assumption that no news in good news, I propose to make no
change in the rates of income tax as also of surcharge on income tax in the case of tax-
payers other than. companies.
 38. In order to remove any temptation that people may feel for neglecting
their regular duties in favour of any casual or ephemeral or even imaginary pastime,
I propose to withdraw the present exemption in respect of casual and non-recurring
income when it exceeds Rs.1000 in a year. However, a Finance Minister in particular
should not frown upon those who are specially favoured by the goddess of good lack.
Accordingly, winnings from Sates or other lotteries will be taxed on a concesoional
basis. Those who win a prize in a lottery are perhaps in the same happy position an
people who enjoy a capital gala when their property appreciates in value without any
effort on their part. On this principle, in computing incomes from such winnings a
deduction of Rs.5, 000 plus 50 per cent of the balance will be allowed. However, even
those who are favoured by Fortune should make their offering first at the alter of the
Exchequer - I propose, therefore, to provide for deduction of tax at source at the rate
of 34.5 per cent from crossword puzzles and lotteries. Casual losses will be allowed
to be set off only against the same type of income.
 39. I propose to provide for deduction of tax at source at the rate of 2 per cent
of the payments made to contractors by the Government, local authorities, statutory
corporations and companies. Payments made in turn by contractors, other than
individuals and Hindu undivided families, to subcontractors will attract a deduction at
the rate of 1 per cent. I hope this alliance between the revenue department and
contractors will lead to prompter payments all round.
 40. With effect from 1st April, 1972 Government will pay a rate of interest of
12 per cent per annum on the amount of refund the payment of which is delayed.
Honourable Members will recall that at present the rate of interest we pay is only 9
per cent per annum. h is only fair that the interest charged when there is delay in the
payment. of direct taxes to the Government is also similarly increased from 9 per cent
to 12 per cent per annum.
 41. Capital gains arising from the transfer of jewellery held for personal use
are not so far chargeable to the capital gains tax. This has given rise to fictitious
transactions in jewellery in order to regularise incomes which have escaped taxation.
I propose. therefore, to repair this omission.
 42. Dividends received from cooperative societies are at present completely
exempt from income taxation. I see no justification for this exemption and propose to
withdraw it. Such dividends, however, will be included in the categories of income
which qualify for exemption from income tax upto R a. 3, 000 in a year.
 10

 43. These measures are likely to yield Rs.6 crores in a full year and Rs.3
crores in 1972-73 of which some Rs.2 crores will be the share of the States.
 44. Coming to corporate taxation, I propose to do away altogether with the
special deduction of 5 per cent of profits in the case of domestic companies engaged
in priority industries. This will yield Rs.6 crores in a full year and Rs.4.5 crores in
19,72 -73.
 45. Some months ago when we levied special surcharges, many Honourable
Members had asked why the surcharge on company taxation was fixed at 21/2 per cent
when a surcharge of 5 per cent was levied on many other items including railway
passenger fares. I propose now to remove this discrimination. For the assessment year
1972-73, the surcharge will continue to be 21/2 per cent of the income tax payable by
all companies. However, on income tax payable in advance during the financial year
1972-73, the surcharge would be at the rate of 5 per cent. This change will yield Rs.12
crores over a full year and Rs.9 crores in 1972-73.
 46. There are a number of other changes that are proposed in the Finance Bill
for preventing evasion or avoidance taxes and for rationalising the incentives available
for promoting saying and investment. A few changes are proposed, for example, in
relation to taxation of charitable and religious trusts in the light of recommendations
made by the Wanchoo Committee. Voluntary contributions received by such institutions
will qualify for exemption from income tax only if these are applied to charitable or-
religious purposes or are accumulated for such purposes in the specified manner. The
other important changes relate to audit by a Chartered Accountant and compulsory
registration for a trust to qualify for tax exemption, extension of the definition of
relatives for judging whether the income or property of the trust is being used in a
manner which would constitute disqualification from tax exemption and making the
trust liable to pay wealth tax when any part of the corpus or income of the trust is used
for the benefit of the author of the trust, a substantial contributor to the trust or the
trustees and their relatives, etc.
 47. Regarding incentives for investment and saving, investment in industrial
proprietory concerns or partnership firms will now be included among assets which
qualify for exemption from wealth tax upto Rs.11/2 lakhs. When one category of exempt
assets is changed to another category of such assets, the requirement of minimum
holding for a period of six months will be reckoned with reference to the period of
holding of both the assets. This would remove the difficulty that has been experienced
by many recipients of accumulated Provident Fund contributions. Contributions made
towards the unit-linked- insurance plan of the Unit Trust of India will qualify for
deduction in computing the taxable income of an individual in the same manner as life
insurance premia and contributions to Provident Funds.
 11

 48. The income of approved Gratuity Funds will be exempted from income
tax prospectively from the assessment year 1973-74. The amount of gratuity that will
be exempt from income tax in the case of employees other than Government employees
and employees of local authorities will be subject to a uniform ceiling of half a month’s
salary for each year of completed service or 15 month’s salary or Rs.24,000 - whichever
is the least.
 49. I have come to the conclusion that the small but select class of income-tax
payers in the country deserves some special recognition from the Government.
Accordingly, I propose soon to award to each assessee a distinct and permanent account
number of his own. I am afraid, there is no mark of distinction which does not lead to
easy detection; and I cannot help it if individual account numbers make it difficult to
avoid taxes.
 50. Finally, I come to the demand which has been made by industry that while
the development rebate may be withdrawn, Government should introduce some other
fiscal concessions and announce them in advance so as to impart a continuing
momentum to industrial growth in the country. Government is not averse to the grant
of fiscal concessions. It is, however, felt that fiscal concessions for promoting
industrialisation should not be general or across-the-board in character but should
relate specifically to our social and economic objectives. Again, as far as possible, it
would be desirable to provide incentives which encourage the use of those resources,
such as labour, which are in abundant supply rather than of resources, such as capital,
which will continue to be scarce for a long time to come. The Wanchoo Committee
has made a number of recommendations with different objectives in view. After
examining all these suggestions carefully, we propose to come up with specific
provisions in the Taxation Amendment Bill which is proposed to be introduced later
in the year. These provisions would be designed primarily to promote industrialisation
in the backward regions of the country.
 51. The total yield of all the changes indirect taxation will be Rs.24 crores in
a full year and Rs.16 crores in 1972-73 of which the share of the Centre would be
approximately Rs.14 crores. I could also have taken credit for improvement in tax-
collections as a result of the many changes designed to reduce tax evasion. But I have
decided not to credit myself with any such gains in advance.
 52. Sir, may I now turn to what are perhaps euphemistically called indirect
taxes?
CUSTOMS DUTIES
 53. I have only one main proposal in regard to customs duties. It will be recalled
that in December last, we had imposed a regulatory duty at the rate of 2.5 per cent ad
valorem on most imported products and a higher duty of 10 per cent on a few selected
items. The need to exercise a general restraint on imports remains as great as ever. It is
 12

also necessary in imposing regulatory duties to ensure that the simplification of the
import tariff which was introduced last year is not unduly disturbed. Accordingly, I
propose to apply the 10 per cent ad valorem rate to all items which pay a duty of 100 per
cent or more as well as to the few selected items which were included in the 10 per cent
list last December. A new rate of 5 per cent ad valorem will apply to all items on which
a duty of 60 per cent or more but less than 100 per cent in payable. The remaining items
will continue to bear the regulatory duty of 2.5 per cent. However, those items which
were totally exempted last December will continue to remain so. These changes will
result in an additional revenue of Re. 8. 60 crores in a full year.
 54. I also propose to continue the provisions which enable us to levy a
regulatory duty of customs. However, in keeping with the provisions relating to
regulatory duty of excise, power is being taken to levy regulatory duty of customs also
upto a rate of 15 per cent of the value of the imports.
EXCISE DUTIES
 55. Coming now to Excise Duties, I propose to make no addition to the list of
commodities which can be subject to such duties. But Honourable Members would
appreciate that even without exploring fresh fields or pastures new, it is possible to
increase the yield by more intensive cultivation; and this is a responsibility which I
cannot, escape.
 56. Pursuant to the decision to continue the scheme of levying additional
excise duties in lieu of sales-tax on sugar, textiles and tobacco, we are committed to
raise the overall incidence of these additional excise duties to 10.8 per cent of the
value of clearances by the end of the Fourth Plan period.
 57. To this end, I propose to transfer to the States the entire proceeds of the
regulatory duty of 15 per cent of the effective basic duty on unmanufactured tobacco
which was levied last December by converting it into an additional excise duty which
is itself being rounded upwards on different varieties. As a result, the States will gain
to the extent of Rs.11.56 crores by way of additional duties whereas the Centre will
lose Rs.9.70 crores by way of regulatory duty. At the same time, the basic and special
duties on different varieties of unmanufactured tobacco are being merged in keeping
with a general scheme to which I would soon refer. In the process, I have also taken
the opportunity of rounding upwards the rates on different varieties to make up, in
part, for the loss of revenue to the Centre. The yield of the combined duty, exclusive
of the additional duties for the States, will go up by Rs.9.31 crores.
 58. In the case of cigarettes, a similar rationalisation and rounding off would
result in a gain of Rs.7.63 crores to the State Governments by way of additional excise
duties and a loss of revenue of Rs.4.64 crores under other duties which would now be
combined and shared with the States.

 13

 59. In the field of textiles, I propose to raise some additional revenue for the
States from art silk fabrics. At present, taking all the duties into account and depending
on the price per square metre, there are four different rates that apply to art silk fabrics
namely, 3 per cent, 5.7 per cent, 8 per cent and 10 per cent. I propose to reduce the 5.7
per cent rate to 5 per cent and increase the rate of 10 per cent which applies to fabrics
worth more than Rs.5 per square metre to 15 per cent. Of the additional revenue of
Rs.8.59 crores, the share of the States by way of additional duties will be Rs.5.80
crores and the rest will accrue to the shareable pool between the Centre and the States.
 60. In short, the revenue by way of additional excise duties will increase by
Rs.25 crores and this entire increase will go to the States. Honourable Members would
note that I have left sugar entirely untouched in this exercise.
 61. The Fifth Finance Commission had recommened that from 1972-73, the
special excise duties which have been levied in the past exclusively for the benefit of
the Centre should also be included in the divisible pool. In keeping with this principle,
I have decided to merge the special excise duties with basic excise duties and to round
off the combined rates so as to introduce a certain measure of simplicity in the rate
structure. As a result, with just half a dozen exceptions, all the ad valorem rates of
excise duties will fall under 6 different slabs, namely, 10 per cent, 15 per cent 20 per
cent, 25 per cent, 30 per cent and 50 per cent. To mention a few examples, in the case
of cement, the basic duty of 20 per cent and the special duty of 4 per cent will now be
replaced by a combined duty of 25 per cent. Similarly, items which carry a basic duty
of 15 per cent and a special duty of 3 per cent will now have a rate of 20 per cent
applied to them. There are only four items, viz., latex foam sponge, polyurethane
foam, and articles made from that foam, and tyres for motor vehicles where there is a
basic duty of 40 per cent and a special duty of 8 per cent. The new combined rate for
these items will be 50 per cent. In case Honourable Members feel that the laws of
rounding off always favour the Exchequer, I hasten to inform them that in the case of
coffee, the aggregate rate which works out to Rs.102 per quintal would be rounded
downwards to Rs.100 per quintal. In the case of vegetable non-essential oils, also, the
rate is being reduced from Rs.110.25 per metric tonne to Rs.100 per metric tonne.
 62. In the case of wireless receiving sets, the present system of taxing certain
component parts, i.e., transistors and diodes, has given an impetus to large-scale
smuggling. I propose, therefore, to remove the duty on such parts and replace it by
suitable changes in the duty on wireless receiving sets in such a way that the incidence
of duty will increase with the price of the set. The present exemption from duty for
sets of a value not exceeding Rs.165 and manufactured by the small-scale sector is
being continued.
 63. The combined result of the rationalisation measures would be a gain in
revenue of Rs.10.70 crores.

 14

 64. There are a few items where the opportunity of merging the special duty
with basic duty is also being taken to raise additional revenue. In the case of paints
and varnishes, the additional revenue will be Rs.2 crores and in the case of paper, it
will be Rs.5 crores. The higher rates of duty on paper, however, will apply only to the
more expensive varieties of paper and board. Printing and writing paper used for
exercise note-books and text books will not be affected. Newsprint would also continue
to be exempt from duty and there would be no change either in the case of mill-board
and straw-board where the smaller manufacturer is involved.
 65. Similar increases are being made in the case of rayon and synthetic fibres
and yarn. The more expensive varieties of artificial synthetic fibres and yarn such as
polyester fibre and yarn will bear higher duties. However, rayon filament yarn which
is a comparatively cheap item will remain unaffected. The additional revenue from
these changes is expected to be Rs.6.50 crores.
 66. I now come to a few major proposals which are intended to raise revenue
for the Centre in a manner which serves at the same time some. of our larger social or
economic objectives. It will be recalled that last December a regulatory duty at 50 per
cent of the effective basic excise duty was imposed on steel ingots, iron and steel
products and tin plates so as to bridge the substantial gap between the prices of imported
and indigenous steel. Even after these changes, a considerable gap remains between
imported steel and indigenous steel prices. It is necessary to economise on the use of
steel in the country by charging for it a price which bears a reasonable relationship
with international prices. The basic duty on steel products, therefore, is being raised
by about 30 percent and the regulatory duty of 50 per cent will apply to these higher
basic rates. The total additional revenue from steel products is expected to be Rs.36.20
crores of which Rs.11.80 crores would be by way of regulatory duties.
 67. For similar reasons, the regulatory duty of 25 per cent on aluminium and
its products is being raised to 331/3 per cent of the basic duty. This measure will yield
Rs.4.18 crores.
 68. Honourable Members are also aware of our substantial dependence on
imports in regard to petroleum products. The duty on motor spirit has been raised
substantially in the recent past and this has had the salutary effect of curbing the
growth of demand. As a token of appreciation, I propose, therefore, to leave the motoring
community untouched this year. I am afraid, I have, however, to make up for the
omission last year in the case of kerosene where our reliance on imports is even
greater. In addition, the comparatively low rate of duty on kerosene encourages its
adulteration with other products, particularly with high speed diesel oil. I am well
aware that kerosene is an item of common consumption both in the rural and the
urban areas. But in view of the circumstances I have mentioned, some additional
taxation of kerosene could not be avoided. I propose, therefore, to increase the duty

 15

on kerosene by Rs.59.75 per kilo litre or roughly by about 6 paise per litre. This will
result in an additional revenue of Rs.29.80 crores in a full year.
 69. In the Budget last May, we had introduced a duty on compounded
lubricating oils and greases. Lubricating oils are also manufactured and marketed to
some extent by a mere Blending of two oils without any added ingredient. There is no
reason why these marketable oils should not be made liable to duty. I propose, therefore,
to amend suitably the definition of the existing tariff item which will yield an additional
revenue of Rs.5 crores. The duties on asphalt and bitumen as also on petroleum waxes
are also being suitably revised to yield -an additional revenue of Rs.3.30 crores.
 70. It has often been said that the agricultural sector which has been witnessing
significant growth in income over recent years should also make, an appropriate
contribution to the overall needs of the country. We have appointed a Committee
under the Chairmanship of Professor K. N. Raj to examine the whole question of
taxation of agricultural incomes and wealth. Steps have also been taken to raise
additional revenue from this sector by levying a-duty on tractors and on fertilizers. I
propose now to raise the duty on fertilizers from 10 per cent to 15 per cent. This will
result in additional revenue of Rs.12.50 crores. Duty at the rate of 10 per cent will also
now be levied on power-driven pumps which are designed primarily for handling
water. This measure is expected to yield a revenue of Rs.2 crores.
 71. There are a few other minor items such as synthetic organic dyestuffs and
optical bleaching agents where the rate of duty is being changed from 15 per cent to 20
per cent with an additional yield of Rs.2.63 crores. The duty on aerated waters with
blended concentrates is being increased from 10 per cent to 20 per cent with an additional
yield of Rs.1.65 crores. Pistons will now he added to the list of motor-vehicle parts for
the purposes of duty. The revenue yield from this would be Rs.50 lakhs.
 72. The merger of special duty with basic duty results in a rate of Rs.605 per
metric tonne on hessian and of Rs.385 per metric tonne in the case of other jute
products which relate mainly to sacking. I propose to round off these rates to Rs.600
and Rs.400 per metric tonne respectively. The regulatory duty will remain unchanged
at 50 per cent. The not gain to the Exchequer would be Rs.1.76 crores of which
Rs.1.20 crores would be by way of regulatory duties.
 73. Throughout ages, our spinners and weavers have produced an infinite and
ever-changing variety of colour, texture and design to beguile our fancy; and the
Central Board of Excise and Customs has had a difficult task in evolving a textile
tariff which can keep pace with all the subtle nuances of our textile products. I propose
to make one more effort and introduce an extensive rationalisation of the textile tariff
which has been worked out after a great deal of detailed examination. Honourable
Members would, I am sure, be happy to note that the overall revenue effect of this
rationalisation, at any rate, would be insignificant.
 16

 74. Finally, I would like to round off by a few concessions in excise duties. In
the case of some items, duty-free clearance upto a value of Rs.50,000 is allowed
subject to the proviso that the total clearances from the unit do not exceed Rs.2 lakhs
in a year. In some other cases, clearances upto a value of Rs.1 lakh are exempted. I
propose now to raise the exemption limit in all cases where the lower limit of Rs.50,000
is allowed today to Rs.1 lakh subject to the upper ceiling remaining unchanged at Rs.2
lakhs. This measure which is intended to help the smaller units will cost the Exchequer
Rs.1.40 crores in a full year.
 75. Some concessions were introduced in the last Budget to encourage the
use of minor oils in the manufacture of soap. In view of the urgent need to reduce our
dependence on imports in regard to vegetable oils in general, I propose to increase the
incentive by reducing the minimum percentage of use of minor oils from 5 per cent to
3 per cent and by introducing a rate of rebate of Rs.4.50 per metric tonne on the duty
leviable on soap as long as the reduced minimum use of minor oils obtains. This
rebate will increase progressively by Rs.1.50 per tonne for every additional percentage
point increase in the utilization of these oils. A similar concession in relation to rice
bran oil used in the manufacture of soap at the rate of Rs.150 per tonne for every
additional percentage point of use of rice bran oil beyond a minimum level of 15 per
cent will also be given.
 76. To encourage the use of rice bran oil in the manufacture of vanaspati, the
minimum percentage use of 7 per cent which was prescribed last year is being reduced
to 1 per cent without any change in the rate of rebate which would remain Rs.100 per
metric tonne on the duty payable on vanaspati produced from such oil. Similarly, the
incentive for greater use of ootton-seed oil in the manufacture of vanaspati is also
being increased on a graded basis. The present general concession of Rs.100 per tonne
of vanaspati produced from cotton-seed oil will be withdrawn and a minimum
compulsory usage of 10 per cent prescribed. Beyond this percentage, however, the
rebate would be Rs.200 per metric, tonne upto 20 per cent of usage, Rs.250 per metric
tonne from 20 to 30 per cent of usage and again Rs.200 per metric tonne beyond 30
per cent of usage. These concessions on oils would cost the exchequer about Rs.60
lakhs.
 77. Honourable Members would be happy to know that I have no proposals
this year in regard to postal and telegraph rates. The Finance Bill, however, provides
for some changes in the sales-tax law applicable to Delhi to remove certain lacunae
which act to the detriment of sales tax revenue accruing to the Delhi Administration.
TO SUM UP
 78. Taking all the proposals together, the total additional revenue from Excise
duties would be of the order of Rs.145 crores in 1972-73 of which Rs.97 crores will
accrue to the Centre and roughly Rs.48 crores to the States. In addition, countervailing
 17

import duties which will apply in respect of all changes in excise duties other than
those relating to iron and steel and aluminium are expected to yield an additional
revenue of Rs.13.40 crores. Other changes in Customs duties win yield. as already
mentioned, an additional revenue of Rs 8.60 crores for the Centre. The additional
yield from direct taxes for 1972-73 would be Rs.14 crores for the Centre and Rs.2
crores for the States. All in all, the additional revenue at the Centre next year will he
of the order of Rs.133 crores and for the States, Rs.50 crores. The initial deficit of
Rs.375 crore will thus stand reduced to Rs.242 crores which I think is a reasonably
safe level.
 79. Sir, in conclusion, may I express the hope that the Budget proposals I
have just presented will be judged in their entirety and against the background of the
formidable challenge we continue to face as a nation. The level of investment in the
economy needs to be raised substantially at the present juncture. This is necessary not
only in the interest of growth, particularly industrial growth, but also for making a
tangible impression on the well-being of the most disadvantaged sections of society.
We have also to assist Bangladesh in her immediate task of restoring a measure of
stability and viability to the economy. Nor can we let down our guard in regard to the
security and integrity of the nation. At the same time, deficit financing must be kept
within reasonable proportions.
 80. Fortunately, the bulk of the unavoidable and indeed necessary increase in
outlay next year will be financed by the normal growth in revenues. If I have not been
able to avoid additional taxation altogether, I hope Honourable Members would
remember that I have not been unduly cautious either in providing a stimulus to growth
and social welfare by a substantial increase in Plan outlay. Some of my tax proposals
will also serve other objectives such as self-reliance. It is in this sense that I spoke at
the outset of quickening the mutually reinforcing process of growth, social justice,
self-reliance, investment and resource mobilization. I can only hope that taken in their
entirety, the Budget proposals will take the economy one stage forward in its march
towards our cherished goals.
 I thank you.
 (March 16, 1972)




 18

