 56. I now come to my proposals for personal taxation. Honourable Members
would recall that earlier in my speech I had referred to the need for curbing excessive
investment in urban property which has been rising rapidly in value due to a variety
of reasons. Without such a curb, investment in more productive directions cannot be
encouraged. There has also been a demand that there should be some ceiling on vast
accumulations of urban property. I have considered this problem from various angles
and have come to the conclusion that the best way of dealing with it through a fiscal
measure is by way of an additional wealth tax on such properties. The tax will apply
to urban property in towns with a population of one lakh or more. In view of differences
in urban property values in towns of different sizes, I have decided to provide for
different exemption limits according as the population of the town is between 1 lakh
and 4 lakhs, 4 lakhs and 8 lakhs, 8 lakhs and 16 lakhs and over 16 lakhs. The exemption
 15

would vary from Rs.2 lakhs in the smallest of these ranges to Rs.5 lakhs in the highest
of these ranges. Honourable Members will see that the classification of towns that I
have adopted for this purpose is the same as is already available for purposes of
granting compensatory and other allowances to Central Government employees. Urban
properties in excess of these exemption limits will under my proposal, bear an additional
wealth tax at progressive rates rising from one per cent to four per cent on successive
slabs of the total market value of such property. It is not possible for me now to
estimate precisely the revenue from this source, but as at present I would put down the
additional revenue expected at Rs.1.5 crores in 1965-66. I would like to emphasise,
however, that the purpose of this levy is as much to raise revenue as also to achieve
wider social purposes. It may be that as a result of this measure, property owners may
transfer properties to corporate bodies which are not now liable to the wealth tax or
property owning companies may come up. If this tendency develops, Government will
deal with it at the appropriate time.
 57. I propose now to restore the exemption from wealth tax for five years for
equity investment in new industrial companies. This concession will apply in respect
of companies issuing capital for the first time after the 28th February 1965. The
companies issuing bonus shares pay a tax of 121/2 per cent on the face value of these
shares. It stands to reason that if a person pays capital gains tax on bonus shares
issued to him some part of the tax paid by the company on the same issue should go
to mitigate his liability for capital gains tax. I propose, therefore, to allow a rebate of
10 per cent of the face value of bonus shares from the capital gains tax on such shares
but limited to the amount of such tax.
 58. In the region of personal taxation of incomes, the first need is for
simplification of the tax structure. For one thing, the distinction between income-tax
and super-tax is something of an anachronism and the manner in which we allow for
various deductions as at present is also not conducive to either simplicity or
comprehension of net incidence. I have endeavoured to simplify the whole tax structure
by integrating super-tax with income-tax and in other ways. This simplification will
cost something to exchequer for a little while. But it will improve tax administration
and help to modify the attitude of the ordinary citizen towards the tax liability.
 59. Basically, I wish to provide for a system in which the present free allowance
for purposes of income-tax will be discontinued, thus eliminating inter alia the element
of acute discrimination against unmarried women and bachelors. Incomes in future
will be chargeable to tax, subject to relief on account of personal allowance for every
individual of Rs.2000 with an additional allowance of Rs.1500 for a married individual
and Rs.400 for each dependent child up to a maximum of two children. For a married
individual with two dependent children no tax will thus be payable up to an income of
Rs.4300 as against Rs.4000 as at present. The relief byway of personal allowances
will, at the new rate, amount to the same absolute sum of Rs.215 as a maximum for
all assessees. The simplification will entail a loss of revenue of Rs.3.64 crores.
 16

 60. Another change in the direction of simplification that I wish to make
relates to deductions in respect of contributions to provident fund, insurance premium
and Cumulative Time Deposit Scheme. Apart from raising the money limit for
concession relating to these items from Rs.10,000 to Rs.12,500 for individuals, it is
proposed to give the concession by a straight deduction from income of 50 per cent of
the amount contributed to the items eligible for the relief. This measure, I am sure,
will facilitate the calculation of tax liability by each individual. I am also introducing
a new provision for exempting from tax income up to Rs.2,400 on account of
institutional bare of handicapped dependents. In the case of non-institutional care the
limit will be Rs.600. Honourable Members would agree with me that a measure of
relief in this respect is justified on social grounds.
 61. While streamlining the tax structure and replacing the present taxes by
a revised and unified schedule, I have lowered taxes at all levels of personal incomes.
In the new schedule, the highest marginal rate of taxation on earned incomes which
will be reached at over Rs.70,000 will be 65 per cent. At the same time, the surcharge
on earned income has also been regraded at 5 per cent for incomes between Rs.1
and Rs.2 lakhs, 10 per cent for incomes between Rs.2 and Rs.3 lakhs and 15 per
cent for incomes above Rs.3 lakhs. In our scheme of taxation, we have come to
regard an income of Rs.15,000 as the dividing line for various purposes. The Annuity
Deposit Scheme, for example, does not apply to incomes upto Rs.15,000. I have
also decided that the same limit should be considered as the free limit for purposes
of the unearned income-tax surcharge. The present limit for this purpose is proposed,
therefore, to be raised from Rs.10,000 to Rs.15,000. With the base for unearned
income-tax surcharge being lowered by this measure as well as by the reduction in
tax rates in general, there is a case for increasing the surcharge on unearned incomes.
Accordingly, I propose to levy a surcharge on the tax at the rate of 20 per cent on
unearned incomes between Rs.15,000 and Rs.50,000 and at the rate of 25 per cent
on such incomes above Rs.50,000.
 62. The Finance Bill looks very bulky as it contains a number of amendments
to the Income Tax Act, 1961. This has in the main become necessary in order to give
effect to this scheme of simplification of the tax structure. These amendments are,
however, of a permanent nature and will not have to be repeated in future Finance
Bills.
 63. As I have just said the changes proposed will mean a reduction in tax at
all levels of personal income. The highest marginal rate on unearned income will go
down from 88.125 per cent to 81.25 per cent and that on earned income from 82.5 per
cent to 74.75 per cent i.e. the peak taxation will be reached in respect of income above
Rs.3 lakhs of earned income and above Rs.70,000 of unearned income. For a married
individual with two dependent children, the tax an earned income of Rs.5,000 will go
down from Rs.60 to Rs.35, at Rs.10,000, from Rs.685 to Rs.535 at Rs.20,000 from
 17

Rs.2,360 to Rs.2,085, at Rs.40,000 from Rs.10340 to Rs.9,285, at Rs.70,000 from
Rs.26,590 to Rs.23,585 and at Rs.1 lakh from Rs.44,615 to Rs.39,160. This has been
worked out after taking into account tax benefit on the relative Annuity Deposit.
Despite these reductions, our tax rates will still be higher than in countries like the
United Kingdom and the United States of America at corresponding levels of income.
I make, however, no apology for not reducing personal income taxation in India to the
levels prevailing in other countries. For one thing, the same level of income in India
and United States of America does not imply the same level of absolute well being.
Much less does it imply the same relative position in society as a whole. For a country
like India, an income of Rs.1 or Rs.2 lakhs, represents economic power which is much
greater than that enjoyed by people of the same income in more fortunate lands.
 64. The loss of revenue as a result of the reduction in tax rates and the changes
in surcharges will be of the order of Rs.20.69 crores in a full year. During 1965-66,
there will be an additional loss of Rs.15 crores on all types of direct taxation in
respect of advance collection of taxes. I have, however, every hope that apart from
giving a measure of relief to people in the lower and middle income groups the changes
I have made will stimulate a greater flow of personal savings and reduce the scope and
incentive for tax evasion.
 65. Apart from the major changes I have described earlier, I propose to make
some other changes in the income-tax provisions. I had announced on the 24th
December, 1964 my intention of giving tax credit certificates to individual investors
in equity issues of new industrial undertakings, of exempting interest income from
funds brought to India and invested in banks in non-resident accounts and exemption
of interest on Government securities from the unearned income surcharge. Provision
has been made in the Finance Bill to give effect to these changes. It is also proposed
to extend the rebate on donations to amounts given for renovation of places of public
worship, approved in this behalf and also to exempt such gifts from gift tax. The
annuity received in respect of the Annuity Deposit Scheme is proposed to be treated
as earned income.
 66. The present tax concession in favour of foreign technicians whose contracts
have been approved by Government is for a period of three years with a grace period
of two years where the employer pays the tax. For certain industries and sophisticated
processes, the services of such technicians have to be retained for a longer period. It
is, therefore, proposed that the second period of two years can be extended by a
further period of three years with the approval of Government. During the extended
period also the tax may be paid by the employer without attracting tax on tax.
 67. Representations have been received from professional persons like
Chartered Accountants, Architects and Solicitors for tax relief to enable them to
make some provision for a superannuation scheme. Recognising the need for this, I
propose to give tax relief to partners of firms engage d in the profession of Chartered
 18

Accountants, Architects, Solicitors and Lawyers on amounts spent for the purchase
of life annuities, commencing at an advanced age, under an approved annuity scheme
or sum contributed by them to an approved fund for providing retirement benefits.
This relief will be in the form of a straight deduction of such payments from their
total income subject to a limit of 10 per cent of the total income or Rs.5,000 whichever
is lower.
 68. In order to provide a disincentive for repatriation of funds by foreign
investors who sell out their interest in industrial holdings, it is proposed that when
such persons reinvest the sale proceeds in approved industrial securities, rebate of
capital gains tax, if any, due on the original investment will be allowed in proportion
to the amount reinvested.
 69. A change is being introduced in the basis of charging taxes on non-resident
assessees as well as resident assessees who are not ordinarily resident. In order to
remove some of the present complications and reduce the rigour of the tax burden,
these assessees will be charged to tax from the assessment year 1965-66 on their
income assessable in India at the rates applicable to residents but without deduction of
personal allowances for non-residents. The concept of world income is being dropped
in their case. The loss of revenue in this case is not material.
 70. So far as Estate Duty and Gift-tax are concerned, I propose to enlarge
some of the existing concessions and also to amend certain provisions where I find
that their interpretation has been causing undue hardship to assessees. For example,
when a person gifts any property during his life time, the property will be liable for
inclusion in the estate on his death under certain circumstances, namely, if he dies
within two years after making the gift or if he has possession or enjoyment of the
property or any benefit out of it during the two years immediately preceding his death.
This requires to be remedied in the light of our present rates of Gift Tax and Estate
Duty. I, therefore, propose to reduce the period of two years to one year and further to
provide that where Gift Tax has been paid at the enhanced rates of Gift Tax in force
from 1964-65 on any gift of property to the wife, son or other close relative, there will
be a total exclusion of such property from the estate of the donor if he dies after five
years from the date of gift. I also propose to make a provision that if the donor stays
in a house which he has gifted to his wife, son or other close relative and there is no
right of residence or any benefit reserved to him under the deed of gift, or under any
collateral disposition, the property will not be included in the estate if the donor dies
after one year from the date of gift. Again, when a pension is given to the family of a
deceased employee by Government or by some other body or out of a superannuation
fund created by an employer and approved under the income-tax Act or out of a
similar fund maintained by any of the international agencies, the capitalised value of
the pension attracts Estate Duty. It is considered necessary to rectify the hardship
arising in such cases by exempting such pension from Estate Duty. The loss of revenue

 19

as a result of these measures will be nominal. Further, I propose to make a provision
for the allowance of stamp duty paid on an instrument of gift as a deduction from the
Gift Tax subject to certain limits and conditions.
 71. I now come to my proposals in regard to unaccounted incomes and wealth
which, as I have already mentioned, are a source of considerable mischief in the
economy. The question of how to mitigate this evil is a baffling and difficult one. We
have already taken a number of measures, apart from intensification of searches and
the like, to encourage voluntary disclosures. Amounts so disclosed are being exempted
from penalty. These measures have had some success in encouraging voluntary
disclosures particularly from people who have comparatively small and medium
incomes to disclose. Various suggestions have been made from time to time to encourage
disclosures on a larger scale and to give an opportunity to those who wish to turn a
new leaf to do so without undue harassment. I have every hope that with the reduction
in tax rates that I have already proposed the scope and incentive for tax evasion in
future would be reduced. The present time therefore, offers a good opportunity to
enable people who have evaded tax in the past to come out and make a clean breast of
it. I recognise that it is not at all an easy matter to devise a solution which would at the
same time be fair to people who have paid taxes honestly in the past and reasonable
enough to encourage voluntary disclosures on an adequate scale on the part of those
who wish now to be relieved of their past evasion. I have attempted to devise a
solution bearing in mind all the complex economic, social and moral considerations
that underlie the phenomenon of unaccounted income and wealth. I can only hope that
honest tax-payers will not be aggrieved by what I propose to do and that those who
have been misled in the past would find in it reason enough to return to the path of
civic responsibility.
 72. My proposal in brief is this. Those persons who have undisclosed income
to declare can make a declaration with relevant particulars and at the same time deposit
in cash at the Reserve Bank of India sixty per cent of the income declared. The
remaining 40 per cent of the income so declared can be taken to the assessee’s books
under intimation to income tax authorities. No further question of assessment in regard
to the income so disclosed by this process will arise and the identity of the persons
will not be revealed. This offer will be open only for three months from now, till the
end of May. In order to induce people to come out quickly a rebate of 5 per cent of the
tax on all incomes declared and tax paid thereon in the month of March will be given.
In other words, in such cases the effective tax rate will be 57 per cent. Those who feel
that their tax liability in respect of amounts to be disclosed would be less than 57 or
60 per cent would be free to resort to normal disclosure and have the income so
disclosed taxed at the appropriate rates by income tax authorities after proper
assessment. Appropriate provisions are being made in the Finance Bill to give effect
to the scheme I have just outlined. I need hardly add that we propose to continue
with-our searches. It is incumbent upon the Government to use all the legal weapons
 20

at its command to deal with those who spurn this particular opportunity of making
voluntary disclosures.
 73. I also propose simultaneously to float once again the Gold Bonds. On the
last occasion when we issued such a bond, the response did not come up to our
expectations. The new bonds will be issued on exactly the same terms as the old
bonds except in one respect. In view of the increase in interest rates since the last
issue was made the new bonds will carry interest at 7 per cent per annum. Those who
subscribed to the first series of Gold Bonds and thus cooperated with the Government
at a time of national crisis will also be given the benefit of this higher rate of interest
for the remaining years of the currency of the bonds held by them. Any of the old
bonds submitted to the Reserve Bank and bearing the Bank’s imprimatur will bear
interest at the new rate after 1st April, 1965. I would like to add that this concession
is not to be taken as one that would be ordinarily extended to all similar cases. I would
appeal to everyone who holds gold, either under declaration or otherwise, to subscribe
to the new bonds to the maximum possible extent. The New Gold Bond will be in the
market for a period of three months, i.e. till the end of May, 1965.
SUMMING UP
 74. I may now sum up the total effect of the changes that 1 have proposed.
The overall surplus at existing rates of taxation of Rs.10 crores will be augmented to
the extent of Rs.1.5 crores as a net result of changes in indirect taxation. The loss in
revenue of Rs.29.5 crores as a result of reduction in excise duties on a number of
items of daily consumption will be offset by revenue from technical adjustments in
respect of cigarettes and tyres of Rs.75 lakhs, yield of additional excise on copper
steel products and tin plates etc. of Rs.15.75 crores, and increase in Customs Duties
of Rs.14.5 crores.
 75. Among direct taxes, the loss of revenue on account of the introduction of
personal allowances will be R s.3.64 crores and on account of adjustments in rates
Rs.2 0 crores making a total of about Rs.23.64 crores. Modifications in surcharges on
earned and unearned income will involve a loss of revenue of Rs.69 lakhs. The
concessions to Section 104 companies will cost to the exchequer Rs.2.73 crores. Other
miscellaneous concessions amount to Rs.2.34 crores. In addition, there will be a loss
of another Rs.15 crores in 1965-66 in view of the fact that all the new rates in this year
will apply both in respect of income taxable during the year and income on which tax
might be paid in advance. The wealth tax on urban property will yield a revenue of
Rs.1.5 crores. Thus, as a result of all the changes in direct taxation, including changes
in corporate taxation, the total loss to revenue in 1965-66 will be Rs.42.90 crores.
 76. The estimated income under direct taxation from all sources for the year
1965-66 has been put at Rs.704.05 crores. Out of this Rs.42.90 crores will have to be
deducted as a loss because of the concessions mentioned earlier. However, because of
the perceptible lowering in personal taxation and improvement in tax collection, I
 21

shall take a credit of Rs.30 crores making the total estimate of income from direct
taxation from all sources at Rs.691.15 crores. This leaves a deficit of Rs.12.90 crores
in direct taxation as against the budgeted figure. As against this, there is a surplus of
Rs.1.5 crores in indirect taxes. Taking this into account and the effect of the States’
share in excise duties, there will be a loss of revenue of Rs.6.38 crores, which together
with the overall surplus at the existing levels of taxation will give a net surplus of
Rs.3.78 crores,
 77. I have taken no credit for receipts under the voluntary disclosure scheme.
Indeed, it is my hope that the entire loss in respect of direct taxation will be more than
made up during the year not only by improvement in tax collection resulting from the
changes made, but also because of receipts under the voluntary disclosure scheme. It
may, therefore, well be expected that we might end up next year with a larger surplus.
It is with this in view that I have not estimated any diminution in the States’ share of
direct taxes revenue. On the other hand such increases in the States’ share of income
Tax revenue as would accrue would in my view more than compensate, the reduction
in the States’ share in the revenue from Excise Duties.
 78. It is a matter of some satisfaction to me to be able to present this Budget
which holds every promise of being a balanced one-if not a surplus one-taking both
the Revenue and Capital accounts together. Honourable Members, I hope, will also
find similar satisfaction in the fact that we have been able to present a balanced
budget while providing for the needs of the Plan and giving a measure of relief in
direct and indirect taxation. In conclusion 1 would appeal to Honourable Members
and to all those affected by our tax system that they should treat the present Budget as
an earnest of our desire to put the tax structure in this country on an enduring and
rational basis.
 (February 27, 1965)




 22

