 PART B
 6 4 . Honourable Members would have observed that expenditure adjustment
constitutes the core of the proposed fiscal correction during the current financial
year. But the process of fiscal adjustment cannot be complete without revenue
measures to increase the income of the Government. I now seek the indulgence of
the House to present the reliefs, the incentives and the levies in the sphere of direct
taxes.
 6 5 . The revenue from direct taxes, both as a proportion of GDP and as a
percentage of total tax revenues, has registered a steady decline over time. This
trend has to be reversed, so as to restore equity in, and balance to our fiscal
system. Resources for development must be raised from those who have the capacity
to pay. For this purpose, we must place greater emphasis on direct taxes. This calls
for increased rates wherever necessary and a better tax compliance. At the same
time, rationalisation of the system, which reduces the maximum marginal rate of
tax, simplifies the procedures, reduces the plethora of concessions, and brings the
average rates of income tax at various levels of income to more appropriate levels,
is necessary. The time available before presenting the budget was simply not enough
to formulate basic structural changes. Yet, I have made a conscious effort to move
one step forward in this direction.
 6 6 . Nobody can deny the existence of large scale tax evasion, both in terms of
income and in terms of wealth. Unless I find substantial improvement in tax
compliance in the next few months, Government will have no choice but to take
strong measures to make the tax evader pay a sufficiently high price for such
delinquency. Before coming down heavily on tax evaders, I would like to give them

 18
a last opportunity to come clean. The black money so mobilised will be utilised for
the achievement of social objectives such as slum clearance and low cost housing
for the rural poor.
 6 7 . I propose to institute a scheme, under which any person would be allowed
to make a deposit with the National Housing Bank on or before close of business
on 30th November, 1991. Thereupon, forty per cent of such deposit would be
deducted and set apart as a special levy, which would form the corpus of a fund in
the National Housing Bank. This fund will be utilised for financing slum clearance
and low cost housing for the poor, in accordance with guidelines and priorities laid
down by the Government. The depositor would be allowed to draw the balance
amount in one or more installments through account payee cheques for any stated
purpose of his choice. There will be no lock-in period for this deposit. Persons
making such deposits will not be required to disclose the source of funds from
which the deposits are made. In other words, the monies deposited would be provided
complete immunity from enquiry and investigation. The provisions of Direct Tax
Laws would, however, apply to the net deposits after deduction of the special levy,
from the date of the deposit. The levy itself would not be an allowable deduction in
the computation of income of the person concerned. Necessary legislation in this
regard will be introduced shortly, in this session of Parliament. The details of the
scheme and its date of commencement will also be announced soon.
 6 8 . The Income-tax Act contains a provision under which tax payers can avail
of the facility of waiver of penalty and interest on the amount disclosed once in a
life-time. To those who have already availed of this facility, I propose to give just
one more opportunity to disclose their unaccounted incomes. The Finance Bill
contains a proposal for making suitable amendments to section 273A of the Income-
tax Act for this purpose.
 6 9 . The Settlement Commission was set up to provide an opportunity to
assessees to declare their undisclosed income and wealth. Under the existing
procedures, the Commissioner of Income Tax can, on certain grounds, object to
admission of an application by the Settlement Commission. This results in
unnecessary delay. This provision is, therefore, being deleted. The Settlement
Commission will, however, continue to call for and take into account the
Commissioner ’s report, provided it is furnished within a period of six months.
 7 0 . Our election manifesto has promised that we will promote reinvestment of
profits, by suitable tax exemptions, in areas where there is crying need for massive
investment such as low and middle income group housing, highways, roads and
bridges, non-conventional energy, school buildings and supply of drinking water. I,
therefore, propose to make a provision in the Income-tax Act to provide deduction,
in computing taxable profits of a taxpayer carrying on a business or profession, of
the entire amount paid for financing projects or schemes promoting social and
economic welfare. To ensure optimum use of scarce resources, I propose to set up
a National Committee of eminent persons to identify areas requiring support and
for recommending specific projects and schemes. A similar deduction will be allowed
also in the case of taxpayers not carrying on any business or profession.
 7 1 . As a token of my commitment to education and research and in recognition
of the significant role they have to play in our development process, I propose to

 19
extend certain tax concessions that will help in the funding of social science research
and provide some incentive to authors and publishers.
 7 2 . At present, only taxpayers carrying on a business or profession get
deduction for sums paid to any approved university, college or other institutions
for research in social sciences related to the class of business carried on by them.
I consider that there is a case for providing more tax incentives for social science
research. I, therefore, propose to allow the same100 per cent deduction in respect
of sums paid for research in these areas whether related to business or not. I also
propose to allow this deduction to taxpayers not carrying on any business or
profession.
 7 3 . The role of books, particularly in the context of our National Literacy
Mission as well as the National Education Policy cannot be overemphasized. To
encourage publication of better and less expensive books and to give a fillip to the
publishing industry, I propose to revive, with effect from the current accounting
period, the deduction of twenty per cent of profits from publication of books for a
period of 5 years. To encourage the publication of quality text books in various
Indian languages I also propose to revive the 25 per cent deduction from professional
income of authors of text books in Indian languages. This will also be available for
a period of five years, beginning with the current income-earning period.
 7 4 . Offshore country funds are emerging as important channels for attracting
foreign institutional investment particularly from non resident Indians. India made
a beginning in this direction in 1989. Of late, however, there are signs of diminishing
interest of foreign institutional investors in off-shore India country funds. The
comparative national tax structure is one of the key factors affecting the direction
of international financial flow. I, therefore, propose to substantially reduce the rate
of tax on dividend income received by the off-shore funds from the units of UTI or
other mutual funds and on long-term capital gains from such units. On dividend
income the proposed rate of tax will be 10 percent as against the existing rate of 25
percent. On long-term capital gains, I propose to have the same rate of 10 percent
as against the effective rate of about 45 percent at present.
 7 5 . In the light of our deep emotional involvement with the struggle of the
Black majority in South Africa and as a further affirmation of our commitment to
South-South cooperation, I propose that donations to the AFRICA FUND be entitled
to 100 per cent deduction under section 80G of the Income-tax Act.
 7 6 . The Government is committed to the welfare of our unfortunate
handicapped citizens. In an effort to mitigate in some small measure their hardship,
I propose to increase the deduction available under Section 80 U of the Income-tax
Act in respect of totally blind or physically handicapped persons, from fifteen
thousand rupees to twenty thousand rupees. The benefit of this tax concession is
also proposed to be extended to partially blind persons.
 7 7 . Promotion of housing activity ranks high in Government’s socioeconomic
priorities. Towards this objective, I propose to extend the benefit of tax rebate
under section 88 of the Income-tax Act also to contractual schemes floated by
public housing corporations like HUDCO and State Housing Boards along the lines
of the Home Loan Account Scheme of the National Housing Bank. Further, the tax
rebate under section 88 will also be available in relation to installment/repayment

 20
of loans towards cost of land and also in cases where the house was purchased or
constructed before 1st April, 1987.
 7 8 . Our software industry has made considerable progress in recent years.
However, there is still a vast unexploited potential for growth. It is time we make
all-out efforts to capture the overseas software market. With this objective, I propose
to extend the tax concession under section 80HHC of the Income-tax Act to export
of software. With this concession, the exports of this industry should register rapid
growth.
 7 9 . I also propose to extend the concession under section 80HHC to the export
of processed minerals.
 8 0 . I consider that scientific, technical and professional skills, knowledge and
experience possessed by our professionals in various fields like architecture,
accounting etc. have an increasing capacity to earn foreign exchange for the country.
Many of them carry on their professions as individuals or partnership firms. To
enable them to benefit from the tax concession available under section 80-O, I
propose to extend, to the non-corporate assessees, the concession presently available
only to the corporate sector.
 8 1 . In order to encourage development of tourist infrastructure in regions
where such facilities are almost non-existent today, I propose to exempt from
Expenditure Tax for a period of ten years expenditure incurred in new approved
hotels set up in hilly and other remote areas. I also propose to allow to such hotels
a deduction of 50 per cent from their profits instead of the normal 30 per cent
under section 80-I, subject to certain conditions.
 8 2 . As a token of my appreciation of the role of a healthy capital market in the
development of our economy, I propose to raise the basic deduction of Rs 10,000
now available under section 48 of the Income-tax Act in respect of long-term capital
gains to Rs 15,000.
 8 3 . As indicated earlier, I wish to take some positive steps to reverse the trend
of decline in the proportion of direct tax revenues to total revenues. I therefore
propose to raise additional resources this year through a greater reliance on direct
taxes. I now turn to my proposals for ensuring better tax compliance and moblising
revenues through the imposition of additional taxes.
 8 4 . To enable the Government to identify income earners, most of whom would
not otherwise declare their income or would not declare their full income, I propose
to extend the scheme of tax deduction at source to cover new areas of payments in
the nature of commissions, interest paid by banks on time deposits and withdrawals
from the National Savings Scheme. To minimise the inconvenience for small
depositors, tax will be deducted at source only in respect of payments in excess of
Rs.2500 per year. Those receiving payments in excess of the limit but not having
taxable income will have the facility of collecting payment with no tax deduction by
filing a declaration in the prescribed manner.
 8 5 . The present provision for offsetting short-term capital losses against income
leads to tax avoidance. I, therefore, propose that any loss on transfer of a capital
asset will be set off only against gain from transfer of another capital asset. This is

 21
only logical. It should also stop the practice of buying short-term capital losses
being resorted to by some unscrupulous tax payers.
 8 6 . Over the years, those with an instinct for gambling have increasingly
patronised the races. I propose to withdraw the income-tax exemption of Rs.5000
in respect of earnings from races, including horse races. I am sure that persons
who place bets will now also have the added pleasure of sharing their earnings
from races with the Government.
 8 7 . Professor Kaldor once observed that no civilised society should have a
maximum marginal rate of income tax higher than 45 per cent. We are firmly
committed to a tax system which is simple, credible, yet progressive, in which
people realise that honesty is the best policy. I expect to make a beginning in this
direction as soon as we can overcome the present fiscal difficulties. I am confident
that this process can be completed before the end of the five year term of our
Government. Tax payers can help to accelerate the process of tax reform if all of
them resolve to pay their income-tax dues fully and promptly. In the midst of a
fiscal crisis however, such a change is not feasible. We must wait for better times.
The best I can do under the circumstances, is what I propose to do this year : keep
the personal income-tax rate structure including the surcharge unchanged. That I
have not added to the burden of the taxpayer is, in itself, a relief.
 8 8 . I have received several representations that wealth-tax rates need to be
rationalised. I see considerable merit in these representations. However, taking into
account the needs of revenue and also for want of time, I propose to make no
change in the rates of wealth-tax.
 8 9 . For the purposes of levy of wealth-tax, the rules of valuation of assets aim
at capturing their market value, or near about, as on the valuation date. I find that
a distortion has crept into these rules. When an individual holds any asset in his
name its valuation is at the market value. However, if a group of persons holds its
assets through an investment company the taxable value of these assets gets reduced
considerably because it is based on the book value and not on the market value. I,
therefore, propose to remove this anomaly by providing that in valuing unquoted
shares of an investment company, the break-up value of the share will be determined
after revaluing the assets of the company at their market value.
 9 0 . I feel disappointed that the phenomenal growth in the output, value added
and profits of the corporate sector, in recent years, has not been appropriately
reflected in corporate tax collections. The experience of the preceding financial
year, in particular, is a matter of serious concern. I am, therefore, raising the
corporate tax rate for widely held companies, from 40 to 45 per cent. A corresponding
increase of 5 percentage points from 45 to 50 per cent is being made in the corporate
tax rate for closely held companies. I also propose to continue the existing surcharge
of 15 per cent.
 9 1 . The traditional distinction in corporate tax rates between trading companies
and industrial companies has outlived its utility. I therefore propose to remove this
distinction.
 9 2 . I recognise that in the medium term the rates and structure of corporate
taxation have to be consistent with the needs of an economy aiming to become
internationally competitive. I shall attend to this task as soon as we have overcome
the present fiscal crisis.

 22
 9 3 . In our economy, labour is abundant and capital is scarce. These economic
realities have to be reflected in our fiscal policy. Yet, over the years, the Indian
economy has witnessed a disturbing shift towards greater capital intensity in
production. This has led to distortion and avoidable hardship in cases where labour
is replaced, or employment potential reduced, by resort to capital intensive methods
of production, even in cases where such a shift is not justified on other economic
and technical considerations. Fiscal incentives have been conducive to such a
shift. While there can be no compromise with the imperatives of technological
upgradation and continuous modernisation, the tendency towards excessive capital
intensity in our industry must be checked.
 9 4 . The rates for depreciation prescribed in 1987, in relation to plant and
machinery, are far too generous and provide much more than is needed to
compensate for wear and tear. These rates of depreciation do not reflect the true
economic life of business assets. An asset would be almost fully written off in six
years at the present rate of 33.33 per cent applicable to the bulk of plant and
machinery. I think an eight year period would be more reasonable taking into
account the pace of technological change in India, the true economic life of the
business assets, and the need to discourage tax induced replacement of assets.
Therefore, I propose to reduce the general rate of depreciation for machinery and
plant from 33.33 per cent to 25 per cent. I also propose to reduce the rate of
depreciation for aeroplanes, motor buses, motor taxis and some other equipments
from 50 per cent to 40 per cent, which would mean almost complete recoupment
of cost in six, instead of five years. However, to encourage use of energy saving
devices and renewable energy devices, I propose to continue to provide 100 per
cent depreciation on such items of plant and machinery as also some others.
Further, I also propose to restrict the rates of depreciation to 50 per cent of the
normal rates of depreciation in cases where the asset is used for less than 6
months in a year.
 9 5 . Tax support to special institutions may be necessary in their nascent
stage. However, it should not be extended in perpetuity. Such institutions must
strive to become self-reliant. The Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI) has
been enjoying complete tax exemption in respect of its income since its inception,
unlike other public financial institutions. I propose to withdraw this tax exemption,
which is no longer necessary.
 9 6 . In 1987, the Government had introduced a tax on ostentatious expenditure.
It is in the form of a tax of 20 per cent of expenditure incurred in hotels where the
room rent exceeds Rs.400 per day. I propose to extend the coverage of this tax to
the expenditure incurred in restaurants providing superior facilities like air-
conditioning. This tax will be levied at the rate of 15 per cent of such expenditure.
 9 7 . In view of the binding fiscal constraints and the need to mobilise resources,
I propose to revive the interest-tax which was first introduced in 1974 and withdrawn
in 1978, re-introduced in a modified form in 1980 and finally withdrawn in 1985.
I am enlarging, slightly, the coverage of this tax. The new tax will be levied on the
gross amount of interest received by all banks, financial institutions and non-
banking financial companies in the corporate sector on loans and advances made
in India. These institutions would reimburse themselves by making necessary
adjustments in the interest rates charged from borrowers. The proposed tax is

 23
expected to raise the cost of borrowing and yield revenue to the Government. It
should, therefore, have both monetary and fiscal impact.
 9 8 . The proposed tax will be levied at the rate of 3 per cent of the gross
amount of interest earned by banks, financial institutions and financial companies
on loans and advances made in India. Interest received on transactions between
the various credit institutions will be exempted from the proposed tax. The proposed
tax will operate prospectively and interest accruing before 1st October, 1991 will
not be taxed. The proposed tax will be allowed as a deduction in computing taxable
income under the Income-tax Act.
 9 9 . I do not propose to take up the time of the House with other minor changes
in the Direct Tax Laws.
 1 0 0 .My proposals on direct taxes are estimated to yield a net revenue gain of
Rs.2139 crores. Of this amount, Rs.97 crores will accrue to the States.
 1 0 1 .Honourable Members of the House are aware that the balance of payments
situation is exceedingly difficult. In order to attract larger inflows of foreign exchange,
I propose to introduce two schemes.
 1 0 2 .Under the first scheme, I propose that remittances in foreign exchange
can be made to any person in India. Even if the remittance is received as a gift by
the donee in India, it would not be subjected to gift tax. The source of funds out of
which the remittances are made would not be subject to scrutiny under the Direct
Tax Laws and Exchange Control Regulations. In other words, I propose to provide
immunity for such remittances under these laws. The provisions of Direct Tax
Laws will apply in the normal manner to the rupee proceeds of these remittances.
The scheme will come into immediate effect and will be open until close of business
on 30th November 1991. The details of the scheme will be announced by the
Reserve Bank of India. I also propose to introduce the necessary legislation in this
regard as early as possible before this House.
 1 0 3 .Under the second scheme, the State Bank of India would issue India
Development Bonds to be denominated in US dollars. These bonds will be available
for purchase by non-resident Indians and their overseas corporate bodies. There
will be no ceiling for investment in these bonds which will have a maturity period
of five years. The bonds will be fully transferable among non-resident Indians.
Interest from the bonds will be exempt from income tax. The bond itself would also
be exempt from wealth tax until maturity. For the non-resident holder, the face
value of the bond and the interest thereon would be repatriable with exchange rate
protection. The bonds can also be gifted to residents, who would be provided with
amnesty and immunity, as in the first scheme for inward remittances. Such amnesty
and immunity will be available only to the first resident donee. The gift would be
exempt from gift tax. The resident donee bond holder would also be entitled to
exchange rate protection, and the same exemption from income tax and wealth tax,
until maturity, but the proceeds will be paid only in rupees in India and would not
be remittable abroad. The bonds will be available for sale at all important branches
of the State Bank of India abroad until close of business on 30th November 1991.
The details of the scheme will be announced by the Reserve Bank of India. I would
also bring before this House the necessary legislation at the earliest.
 1 0 4 .In formulating my proposals on indirect taxes, I have kept in mind the
wider context. In keeping with the promises made in the election manifesto of our

 24
party, we have also to ensure that prices of essential commodities and goods used
by the common man are kept well under check. Conspicuous consumption must
be curbed and the burden of taxation should be borne by the more affluent sections
of the society. In the light of these imperatives, I have attempted to structure the
proposals for customs and excise levies in a manner that indigenous industries are
encouraged, and, at the same time, imports of items required for export production
are not thwarted. In the long term, if revenues are buoyant and tax compliance
improves, I expect to bring down the rates of customs and excise levies. Even now,
some moderation in import duties is being attempted and a more broad-based
effort may be attempted to streamline the structure and reduce the rates in the
next budget. I have also tried to ensure that the proposed changes improve
competitiveness of the industrial sector, particularly the export oriented industries.
 1 0 5 .It is my intention to rationalise and simplify the procedures, rules and
regulations pertaining to indirect taxes, so that the delays in the system are
eliminated, and the interface between the tax collector and the tax payer is reduced
to the minimum. Given the paucity of time, it has not been possible to undertake
such an exercise in this budget, but we should be able to formulate concrete
measures soon as a part of structural reforms in the tax system.
 1 0 6 .Recent years have witnessed an excessive reliance on indirect taxes for
additional resource mobilisation. This escalates costs, fuels inflation and is regressive
in its impact. Therefore, I have not relied on indirect taxes as the major source of
resource mobilisation. Indeed, the overall impact of my proposals for customs and
excise levies is revenue negative in so far as the Central Government is concerned.
 1 0 7 .In the sphere of customs duties, over time, the objective of protection for
infant industries and the need to raise revenues have led to a situation where
import duties prescribed for certain items are inordinately high and, in several
cases, more than 300 percent. As a measure of reform, I propose to reduce the ad
valorem rate of basic plus auxiliary duties of customs to a maximum of 150 per
cent where it is more than that at present, thereby eliminating the tariff peaks
above 150 per cent. The only exceptions that would remain hereafter are imported
alcoholic beverages and passenger baggage. The revenue loss on this account would
be Rs.132 crores in a full year.
 1 0 8 .In view of the deterioration in the fiscal situation last year, auxiliary duty
of customs was increased across-the-board, with effect from 15th December, 1990,
so as to mobilise additional resources. The increase was not quite rational and was
asymmetric in its incidence. In some cases, the auxiliary duty went up by 20
percentage points - from 5 per cent to 25 per cent and from 30 per cent to 50 per
cent, while in some others, by just 5 percentage points i. e., from 45 per cent to 50
per cent. This steep and uneven increase imposed a very high burden of duties on
certain items, and also led to distortions in the overall rate structure. In order to
remove the anomalies which had been created and rationalise rates of duties, I
propose to give a duty relief of 10 percentage points to almost every item which
suffered an increase of 20 percentage points. Moreover, on certain items, which are
important from the point of view of environmental protection, export promotion,
saving of foreign exchange and so on, I propose to roll back the rates to levels
prevailing before 15th December, 1990. These items include waste paper, wood in
the rough, jigat used in the manufacture of Agarbattis, ethylene, machinery for fuel
injection equipment and certain items of machinery for printing and the newspaper

 25
industry. These proposals will result in a revenue loss of Rs.472 crores in a full
y e a r.
 1 0 9 .The prevailing rates of import duty on capital goods for general projects
and machinery are, in general, high. While I cannot make a substantial reduction
at this stage because of the revenue implications, which are considerable, I propose
to reduce the level of duties from 85 per cent to 80 per cent. In tandem, the rate
of duty on their components is also being reduced by 5 percentage points, from the
existing levels of 65 or 70 percent. This proposal would mean a revenue loss of Rs.
167 crores in a full year.
 1 1 0 .A technology upgradation scheme was launched in 1987 by the late Shri
Rajiv Gandhi. Under this scheme, fiscal relief was provided on import of capital
equipment for the manufacture of power generation equipment, paper machinery,
textile machinery and many others to promote domestic production of such
machinery. The scheme has been instrumental in bringing about considerable
improvement in the quality of machines produced in India. In order to give a
further thrust to the scheme, I propose to expand the list of machinery items which
will now attract a concessional duty of 50 per cent. The revenue loss on this
account is estimated at Rs. 5 crores in a full year.
 1 1 1 .We have recently taken several innovative steps to give an impetus to our
exports. I would now like to outline some fiscal measures which will give a further
boost to the export effort.
 1 1 2 .At present 100 per cent export oriented undertakings or units in a free
trade zone are allowed to divert a certain proportion of their production to the
domestic market. However, the present stipulation, that excise duty payable must
be equal to the import duty, has proved to be a deterrent. These units have to be
fostered if they are to compete effectively in the international market; for this
purpose they should not be prevented from creating a niche in the domestic market.
Accordingly, I propose to reduce the excise duty on the goods, permitted to be sold
in the domestic market under the scheme, to a level which would be equivalent to
half the import duty leviable on such goods subject, inter alia, to the condition that
the duty would not be less than the excise duty levied on similar items produced
in the domestic tariff area.
 1 1 3 .To promote the growth of the marine products industry, fiscal relief has
been given by way of customs duty concession on specified machinery items required
by this industry. I propose to extend the duty concession to a few more items of
such machinery. Out of my concern for the welfare of our fishermen, I also propose
to fully exempt from excise duty specified yarns which are generally used for making
fish-nets.
 1 1 4 .In order to encourage the growth of the finished leather industry and also
as a measure of export promotion, I propose to reduce the basic and auxiliary
duties of customs on polyurethane film and foil, as well as polyols from 150 per
cent to 40 per cent. The duty on isocyanates is being reduced from 120 per cent to
40 per cent. The import duty on two important leather preservatives, namely TCMTB
and PCMC, is being reduced from over 150 per cent to 50 per cent. These
preservatives will replace certain other chemicals which are suspected to have
carcinogenic effects. I also propose to extend the concessional duty, available at

 26
present to specified capital goods required by the leather industry to a few more
items of such machinery.
 1 1 5 .Synthetic cubic zirconium, which is the closest imitation of natural
diamonds, has the potential to provide job opportunities for a large number of
artisans. The jewelry made therefrom also has a significant export potential. In
order to encourage indigenous manufacture of cubic zirconium, I propose to reduce
the import duty on the raw materials viz. zirconium oxide and yttrium oxide to the
level of 40 per cent from the present level of over 150 per cent.
 1 1 6 .Our Government attaches the highest priority to agriculture. One of the
promises made in our election manifesto is to provide a massive thrust to food
processing and other agro-based industries, in an endeavour to increase the income
of farmers, create employment opportunities, diversify the rural economy and foster
rural industrialisation. As an important step in this direction, I propose to exempt
agro-based products such as sauces, ketchup, butter, cheese, skimmed milk powder,
vegetable oils, jams, jellies and juices, canned fruits and dried vegetables, certain
soya products, starches and preparations of meat and fish from excise duties
altogether. I am doing so to promote the diversification of our agricultural economy,
to increase the farmers’ share of the consumer ’s income spent on processed
agricultural products, to promote rural industrialisation based on agricultural
produce and to encourage the adoption of modern post-harvest technologies. The
measures I have proposed, I expect, will also lead to some reduction in consumer
prices of such products, providing relief to the harassed consumers in a period of
rising prices. The revenue loss will be Rs.84 crores but I am convinced that the
overall gain to the economy will more than offset the loss to the exchequer.
 1 1 7 .As a relief to the agro-based jute industry, which has been beset with
chronic problems, I propose to reduce the excise duty on products which contain
a minimum of 35 per cent of jute fibre from Rs.660 to Rs.330 per metric ton.
 1 1 8 .At present a number of specified bulk pesticides and pesticide intermediates
enjoy concessional import and excise duties. I propose to extend the duty concession
to a few more bulk pesticides and pesticide intermediates. The proposals involve a
revenue loss of about Rs.11 crores in a full year.
 1 1 9 .There is a money credit scheme in vogue to encourage the use of minor
oils for the manufacture of soaps. I propose to increase the money credit of Rs.640
per metric ton that is currently available in respect of rice bran oil used in the
manufacture of soap to Rs. 1000 per metric ton. In addition, I propose to include
some more non-conventional oils and solvent extracted oils in the scheme. This
would also help in generating more employment for our tribal women. These
proposals involve a revenue sacrifice of about Rs 10 crores in a full year.
 1 2 0 .The MODVAT scheme was introduced in 1986 to minimise the cascading
effect of indirect taxes. The scheme has been well received by the industry, and
there have been persistent demands for its extension to other areas. I propose to
reintroduce the scheme in respect of aerated waters, and also to extend it to cover
man-made fibres and filament yarns in respect of their inputs. While extending the
scheme to fibres and yarns, I do not propose to raise the duty on those fibres and
yarns on which the duty was increased as recently as December, 1990. On other
fibres and yarns, the duty rates have been adjusted with a view to retaining the
collection of excise duties at the earlier level. But duties on polypropylene

 27
monofilament and multifilament yarns are being increased to raise additional
revenue. In respect of aerated waters also, I do not propose any increase in duty.
The proposals involve a revenue loss of about Rs.230 crores in a full year. I expect
that the benefit would be passed on to the consumers in the form of reduced
prices.
 1 2 1 .I propose to rationalise the existing excise duty rates on polyester blended
yarns. As an anti-evasion measure, I also propose to charge additional excise duty
on cotton fabrics containing 40 per cent or less of polyester at the same rates as
applicable to cotton fabrics containing more than 40 per cent of polyester. The
proposals involve a revenue gain of about Rs. 23 crores in a full year.
 1 2 2 .In our effort to make essential drugs available to the people at affordable
prices, I propose to fully exempt five specified anti-epileptic formulations from
excise duty. At present, some drug intermediates and bulk drugs carry a concessional
rate of import duty. I wish to extend the concession to a few more drug intermediates
and bulk drugs, and grant concessions in excise duties to a few more drug
intermediates.
 1 2 3 .In keeping with our commitment to give special priority to cottage, khadi
and village industries, I propose to give some excise duty concessions to this sector.
At present, footwear of value not exceeding Rs.100 per pair manufactured in rural
areas by registered co-operative societies, women’s societies or by institutions
recognised by KVIC, are fully exempted. I propose to raise the value limit of exemption
to Rs. 150 per pair. Further, I propose to extend to synthetic detergents the benefit
of full exemption from excise duty that is presently available to specified products
when manufactured in rural areas by registered co-operative societies, women’s
societies, institutions recognised by KVIC etc.
 1 2 4 .I would now like to outline some of the steps that I propose for the protection
of our environment and for ecological security. In view of our dwindling forest
cover, we must conserve our scarce resources. Therefore, as I have stated earlier,
the import duty on waste paper and wood in the rough is proposed to be rolled
back to the rates that were prevailing before 15th December, 1990. I also propose
to fully exempt from excise duty aluminium doors, windows and their frames so as
to encourage the use of aluminium in the place of wood in construction activities.
Fly ash is a pollutant. It can, however, be put to productive use in the manufacture
of bricks and other construction materials. In order to encourage such use, I propose
to fully exempt from excise duty various building components containing more
than 25 per cent of fly ash or phosphogypsum. I also propose to exempt
phosphogypsum which is one of the bye-products of the fertilizer industry from
excise duty to encourage its use by farmers.
 1 2 5 .Few would disagree that I am one of the most harassed Finance Ministers
in recent times. To perform the onerous task before me, I need support from the
Press. As a gesture of goodwill, I propose to exempt standard newsprint from import
duty which is, at present, Rs. 450 per metric ton. I have already proposed to bring
down the rates of import duty on certain specified machinery and equipment required
by the printing and newspaper industry to the levels that were obtaining before
15th December 1990. The monetary limit of duty free import of photographic goods
by accredited cameramen of the Press is being raised from the present level of Rs.
30,000 to Rs. 60,000. These proposals involve a revenue loss of over Rs. 9 crores
in a full year.

 28
 1 2 6 .Ever since my appointment as Finance Minister, I have had to spend long
hours in office. This has quite naturally made my wife very unhappy. The House
will agree that it is not good for the health of our economy if the Finance Minister
of the country has strained relations with his own finance minister at home. I
propose that the total exemption from payment of excise duty currently available to
utensils made of aluminium, copper and stainless steel be extended to certain
other household items particularly tiffin boxes.
 1 2 7 .The same consideration has induced me to propose a reduction in the
excise duty on specified tableware produced by semi-automatic process from the
present level of 20 per cent to 15 per cent. Mindful of the need for peace at home
and also taking into account the labour intensive nature of the manufacture of
glassware by the mouth blown process, I propose to reduce the excise duty on such
glassware to 15 per cent uniformly. Some people may not applaud my action. But
I am sure most housewives harassed by the ever rising price level will appreciate
my action.
 1 2 8 .In keeping with the commitment in our election manifesto, I shall make
every effort to ensure that indirect taxes do not unduly add to the prices of essential
commodities. Of the items listed in the manifesto, at present, there is no excise
duty on salt, cycles, newsprint, post cards, inland letters and envelopes, and certain
varieties of stoves. Cotton sarees and dhoties attract only additional excise duty in
lieu of sales tax which accrues wholly to the State Governments. I have earlier
proposed to fully exempt edible oils from excise duty. Electric bulbs of upto 60
watts, are already exempt from excise duty. I now propose to fully exempt electric
bulbs, of higher wattage, which presently attract a duty of Re. 1 per bulb, from the
payment of excise duty. Energy efficient chulhas, too, would be exempted from
excise duty. I also propose to reduce the excise duty on two wheelers of engine
capacity exceeding 50 cc but not exceeding 75 cc from 20 per cent to 15 per cent.
 1 2 9 .I recognise that the tax reliefs I have given, by themselves, constitute only
a small step towards the realisation of the objective mentioned in our manifesto in
regard to prices of essential commodities. In pursuit of this objective, I propose to
invite the representatives of industry and trade to sit together with our Government
to work out modalities as to how best we can contribute to the realisation of the
price objectives listed in our election manifesto, for the benefit of the common man.
 1 3 0 .In order to promote tourism which is an important means of earning
foreign exchange, I propose to reduce the import duty on adventure sports equipment
from rates ranging from about 100 to 300 percent to 40 per cent.
 1 3 1 .In keeping with the recent exchange rate adjustments of the rupee, I
propose to raise the baggage allowances including duty free limits for bona fide
gifts suitably; for instance the general duty free allowance for personal baggage is
being raised from Rs.2000 to Rs.2400.
 1 3 2 .Let me now turn to the major proposals for additional revenue mobilisation.
 1 3 3 .At present special excise duty is being levied at the rate of 5 per cent of
the basic excise duty. I propose to raise it to 10 per cent. Since the increase is only
a percentage of the basic excise duty, the impact of the additional levy would be
minimal on prices. For instance, in respect of any article on which the basic excise

 29
duty is say, 20 percent, the increase would be only 1 percent of the value. Tea,
coffee, sugar, kerosene, matches, and vanaspati, being items of mass consumption,
would remain exempt from special excise duty. In addition, I am ensuring that the
increase in special excise duty will not apply to diesel and two wheelers. The proposal
involves a revenue gain of Rs. 1010 crores in a full year, a substantial portion of
which will accrue to the States.
 1 3 4 .One of the promises made in our election manifesto is to evolve policies
and measures to curb conspicuous consumption. In pursuance of this, I propose
to increase the excise duty rates on refrigerators, air-conditioners including
compressors, motor cars, audio and video cassette tapes, video cassettes, picture
tubes, colour television sets, VCRs and VCPs.
 1 3 5 .I propose to increase the excise duty on refrigerators by amounts varying
from Rs.200 to Rs.800 depending upon the capacity, and in the case of air-
conditioners, by amounts varying from Rs.2000 to Rs.30000. I also propose to
raise the excise duty on compressors for air conditioners of a capacity not exceeding
7.5 metric ton by Rs. 1800. The expected additional revenue from these proposals
is about Rs.91 crores in a full year.
 1 3 6 .Motor cars at present attract excise duty at the rate of 50 per cent. I
propose to increase the excise duty to 60 per cent. The duty on taxis at 30 per cent
will, however, remain unchanged. The proposal will yield an additional revenue of
Rs.150 crores per year.
 1 3 7 .I propose to increase the excise duty on audio cassette tapes from Rs 3 to
Rs 5 per sq. metre and on video cassette tapes from Rs 10.50 to Rs 15 per sq.
metre. The estimated revenue gain from the proposal will be Rs.29 crores in a full
y e a r.
 1 3 8 .As regards colour television sets, I propose to increase the excise duty by
Rs.500 and Rs.750 per set, depending on the screen sizes. I propose to raise the
excise duty on colour picture tubes as well. I am exempting all black and white
television sets from excise duty and shifting the burden to picture tubes. I also
propose to increase excise duty on VHS type VCRs and VCPs by Rs.400 per set and
Rs. 250 per set, respectively, and on other types of VCRs and VCPs, from 25 per
cent to 30 per cent. The revenue gain on this account is Rs. 66 crores in a full year.
 1 3 9 .Every Finance Minister has to do his bit to curb smoking, which is injurious
to health. I must also fall in line and add to the tax on cigarettes. In respect of non-
filter cigarettes, I propose to raise the duties by Rs.10 to Rs.25 per thousand
cigarettes depending upon the length. In respect of filter cigarettes, the increase
will be between Rs.35 and Rs.125 per thousand cigarettes. However, filter cigarettes
exceeding 85 mm will attract the ceiling rate prescribed in the excise tariff. This
will give us additional revenue to the extent of Rs. 300 crores in a full year.
 1 4 0 .The excise duty on hand-made branded biris is Rs 3.75 per thousand.
Although the duties on cigarettes have been increased almost every year, excise
duties on biris have remained unchanged since 1986. I feel that biri smokers
should not be denied the opportunity of increasing their share of contribution to
the national exchequer. I accordingly propose to increase the duty on hand-made
branded biris, other than paper rolled biris to Rs 4.50 per thousand. Paper rolled
biris will attract a duty of Rs.10 per thousand. The present exemption on other

 30
hand made biris would, however, continue. The expected additional revenue is
Rs.33 crores in a full year.
 1 4 1 .Pan masala not containing tobacco attracts a specific rate of excise duty.
I propose to raise the excise duty on the same by Rs.5 and Rs.10 per kg. depending
on its value. This involves a revenue gain of Rs.4 crores in a full year.
 1 4 2 .The excise duty on sugar, which is levied on a specific basis, has remained
unchanged since 1983, with the result that the ad-valorem incidence has come
down as the price of sugar has increased considerably over this period. In ad
valorem terms, the present incidence of excise duty on levy sugar is more than the
incidence on free sale sugar. In order to correct the situation, I propose to increase
the excise duty on free sale sugar from the present level of Rs.50 to Rs.71 per
quintal. This would mean an additional tax burden of 21 paise per kilogram of free
sale sugar which costs about Rs.10 per kg in the market place. This proposal is
expected to yield an additional revenue of Rs.122 crores in a full year. I would like
to make it clear that I am not proposing any increase in excise duty on levy sugar
which is sold through the public distribution system.
 1 4 3 .I propose to exclude khandsari sugar from the list of items chargeable to
additional excise duty. The State Governments will be free to levy sales tax on
khandsari sugar, if they so desire.
 1 4 4 .Molasses which is a bye-product of the sugar industry is presently subject
to excise duty at the rate of Rs.120 per metric ton. A substantial portion of molasses
is used in the manufacture of liquor. In the circumstances, it can bear a higher
rate of duty. Accordingly, I propose to increase the excise duty on molasses to
Rs.150 per metric ton. The estimated revenue gain from the proposal is Rs.13
crores in a year.
 1 4 5 .The details of the revenue implications of the measures announced are
given in the Explanatory Memorandum to the Finance Bill.
 1 4 6 .I have also proposed certain amendments in the Finance Bill seeking to
effect changes in the Customs Act, and excise and customs tariffs. These include
certain consequential amendments to the customs tariff based on the amendments
to the Harmonised Commodity Description and Coding System which has been
adopted by our country in terms of the International Convention on the Harmonised
System. The amendments are merely enabling provisions and do not have significant
revenue implications. Besides, there are proposals for amendment of some of the
existing notifications. In order to save the time of the House, I do not propose to
recount them.
 1 4 7 .The increases in excise duties will lead to a revenue gain of Rs.1799.00
crores while the reliefs will amount to Rs. 358.06 crores in a full year. The net
revenue gain from excise duties is thus Rs.1440.94 crores in a full year, of which
the States will get Rs.750.04 crores leaving the balance of Rs.690.90 crores for the
Centre. The proposals in regard to changes in the customs duties imply a revenue
loss of Rs.822.52 crores and a revenue gain of Rs.78.00 crores in a full year. The
net impact of the proposals relating to customs duties is a loss of Rs.744.52 crores
in a full year. Thus, as compared with the additional net revenue of Rs.696.42
crores from customs and excise duties, the States would gain Rs.750.04 crores,
while the Centre would lose Rs. 53.62 crores in a full year.

 31
 1 4 8 .Copies of notifications giving effect to the changes in customs and excise
duties effective from 25th July 1991, will be laid on the Table of the House in due
course.
 1 4 9 .The proposals I have made in regard to direct taxes will yield Rs.2139
crores of which Rs. 97 crores will accrue to the States and Rs.2042 crores to the
Centre. My proposals in regard to customs duties will involve a net revenue loss of
Rs.510 crores in the current year while those relating to Union excise duties are
estimated to yield a net additional revenue of Rs. 988 crores in the remaining part
of the current year of which Rs. 515 crores will be the share of States and Rs. 473
crores will be retained by the Centre. Taking both direct and indirect taxes into
account, the net gain to the Centre in the current year is estimated at Rs. 2005
crores and with this, the budgetary deficit of the Centre for the current year is
estimated at Rs. 7719 crores, the revenue deficit at Rs. 13854 crores and the fiscal
deficit at Rs. 37727 crores.
 1 5 0 .Sir, I have now nearly come to the end of my labour. Before I conclude, let
me end on a personal note. Years ago, in a letter which Jawaharlal Nehru wrote to
the young Indira Gandhi, he advised her that in dealing with the affairs of the State
one should be full of sentiment but never be sentimental. But the House will forgive
me if on an occasion like this I cannot avoid being somewhat sentimental.
 1 5 1 .I was born in a poor family in a chronically drought prone village which
is now part of Pakistan. University scholarships and grants made it possible for me
to go to college in India as well as in England. This country has honoured me by
appointing me to some of the most important public offices of our sovereign Republic.
This is a debt which I can never be able to fully repay. The best I can do is to pledge
myself to serve our country with utmost sincerity and dedication. This I promise to
the House. A Finance Minister has to be hard headed. This I shall endeavour to be.
I shall be firm when it comes to defending the interests of this nation. But I
promise that in dealing with the people of India I shall be soft hearted. I shall not
in any way renege on our nation’s firm and irrevocable commitment to the pursuit
of equity and social justice. I shall never forget that ultimately all economic processes
are meant to serve the interests of our people. It is only through a commitment to
social justice and the pursuit of excellence that we can mobilise the collective will
of our people for development, to give it a high moral purpose and to keep alive the
spirit of national solidarity. The massive social and economic reforms needed to
remove the scourge of poverty, ignorance and disease can succeed only if backed
by a spirit of high idealism, self sacrifice and dedication.
 1 5 2 .The grave economic crisis now facing our country requires determined
action on the part of Government. We are fully prepared for that role. Our party will
provide an effective Government to our country. Our people are our masters. We
see the role of our Government as one of empowering our people to realize their full
potential. This budget constitutes a vital component of a comprehensive vision, a
well thought out strategy and an effective action programme designed to get India
moving once again.
 1 5 3 .Sir, I do not minimise the difficulties that lie ahead on the long and
arduous journey on which we have embarked. But as Victor Hugo once said, “no
power on earth can stop an idea whose time has come.” I suggest to this august
House that the emergence of India as a major economic power in the world happens
to be one such idea. Let the whole world hear it loud and clear. India is now wide
awake. We shall prevail. We shall overcome.
 1 5 4 .With these words, I commend the budget to this august House.
 [24th July, 1991]

