 PART B
DIRECT TAXES
 1.1 Sir, let me present first my proposals in the field of direct taxes. Honourable
Members will recall that the rates of income-tax on personal incomes were reduced
last year on the basis of a recommendation of the Direct Taxes Enquiry Committee. It
was expected that this would lead to better tax compliance. I think the policy adopted
last year should be given a fair trial. I, accordingly, propose not to make any change
in the rates of income-tax in the case of non-corporate taxpayers.
 1.2 At present, the basic rate of income-tax in the case of closely-held industrial
companies stands at 55 per cent on the first Rs.2 lakhs of taxable income, and 60 per
cent on the balance. On the analogy of the rate structure applicable to the widely-held
 14

companies, I propose to modify this provision so as to apply the higher rate of 60 per
cent on the entire income of such closely-held companies in cases where the taxable
income exceeds Re. 2 lakhs, subject, however, to the usual marginal relief. This measure
will yield Rs.4 crores in a full year and Rs.3 crores in 1975-76. There will be no
change in the rates of income-tax in the case of other categories of companies.
 1.3 The levy of a tax under the interest -tax Act, 1974 on interest received by
scheduled banks has had, the effect of increasing, on an average, the cost of borrowings
from scheduled banks by about one per cent. The levy of this tax has, therefore, made
the acceptance of deposits by non-banking non-financial companies from the public
all the more attractive, specially in the context of the selective credit control measures
adopted by the Reserve Bank. Some corrective by way of a disincentive to borrowings
from the public by these companies seems to be indicated so that credit planning
according to the priorities laid down by the Government is not defeated. I propose,
therefore, that in computing the taxable income of non-banking non-financial
companies, only 85 per cent of the interest paid by them on public deposits will be
allowed as expenditure for tax purposes. This measure will yield Rs.10 crores in a full
year and Rs.7.5 crores in 1975-76.
 1.4 The tax holiday concession is at present available in respect of industrial
undertakings that go into production before 1st April, 1976 and ships which are brought
into use before that date. I propose to extend the concession in these cases for a
further period of five years. This concession is at present available to approved hotels
irrespective of the date by which they may start functioning. I find no justification for
giving preferential treatment to approved hotels over industrial undertakings and ships.
I therefore propose to restrict the concession in the case of approved hotels to cases
where these hotels start functioning before 1st April, 1981.
 1.5 At present, dividends declared by companies out of their tax holiday profits
dividends exempt in the hands of shareholders. Experience has shown that this provision
is difficult to administer, since any change in the quantum of income of the company
distributing dividends requires modification of the assessments of all its shareholders,
who may be residing in different parts of the country. I, therefore, propose to withdraw
the exemption in respect of dividends paid by companies out of their tax holiday
profits attributable to the extended period. Shareholders will, however, not stand to
lose, since 1 propose to increase the quantum of tax holiday profits in the case of
companies from 6 per cent to 7.5 per cent per annum of the capital employed in new
industrial undertakings, ships or hotels.
 1.6 In order to channelise corporate savings into high priority industries, I
propose to exempt from income-tax, inter-corporate dividends derived by domestic
companies from new companies engaged in the manufacture of fertilisers, pesticides,
paper and cement.
 1.7 As Honourable Members are aware, initial depreciation allowance at the
 15

rate of 20 per cent of the cost of machinery and plant is allowed in respect of the
priority industries listed in the Ninth Schedule to the income-tax Act. Having regard
to the importance of pesticides to our economy for increasing agricultural production,
I propose to extend the benefit of initial depreciation allowance to the Pesticides
industry also.
 1.8 As another measure for promoting investment in desired areas, I propose
to exempt from wealth-tax for a period of five years investment in equity shares of
new companies engaged in priority industries listed in the Ninth Schedule to the
income-tax Act.
 1.9 Under a provision made in the Finance Act, 1974, development rebate is
admissible in respect of ships which were ordered before 1st December, 1973 if
such ships are acquired before 1st June, 1975. In view of the time lag involved in
acquiring ships, I propose to extend this concession to ships which will be acquired
before 1st January, 1977, provided orders for their acquisition were placed before
1st December, 1973.
 1.10 Under the existing law, a deduction equal to 20 per cent of the profits and
gains derived from the business of publication of books is allowed in computing
taxable income. This concession is available for a period of five years ending with the
assessment year 1975-76. I propose to extend this concession for another five years.
 1.11 Our development efforts can be sustained only through promotion of
savings. I have, therefore, decided to liberalise the concession currently available
under the income-tax Act in respect of long-term savings through provident funds, life
insurance, etc. so as to allow a deduction in respect of 100 per cent of the first Rs.4,
000 of the qualifying savings plus 50 per cent of the next Rs.6, 000 of such savings
plus 40 per cent of the balance. This measure will result in a revenue loss of Rs.8
crores in a full year and Rs.6 crores in 1975-76.
 1.12 Frequent withdrawals are made from Government Provident Funds. I have,
therefore, decided to introduce an incentive bonus scheme to benefit those Government
employees who do not withdraw any amount from their provident fund accounts during
the year. The bonus will be allowed on the subscriptions made during that year and
will be calculated at the rate of 3 per cent for employees drawing pay up to Rs.500 per
month and 1 per cent for employees drawing pay above Rs.500 per month.
 1.13 Honourable Members will notice that a package of measures has been
proposed for improving the investment climate, namely, extension of tax holiday,
exemption of inter-corporate dividends derived from new companies engaged in high
priority industries, exemption from wealth-tax of equity shares in new companies
engaged in certain priority industries, and incentives to greater savings. Despite the
severe constraint of resources, I have thought it advisable to propose these fiscal
incentives as, in my view, investment in priority sectors has to be encouraged now if
 16

we are not to compound our difficulties in the future. These fiscal measures will
reinforce the other measures that the Government have taken for encouraging greater
production in certain vital sectors.
 1.14 In order to give some relief to middle class families who have to bear the
burden of providing higher education to their children, I propose to allow a deduction
in respect of expenses incurred by individuals in this regard. In respect of children
attending degree or post-graduate courses in medicine, engineering or other technical
subjects, the amount of deduction will be Rs.1, 000 per child and in respect of children
attending degree or post-graduate courses in other subjects or diploma courses in
medicine, engineering or other technical subjects, the amount of deduction will be
Rs.500 per child. The new concession will be available in the case of individuals
whose gross total income does not exceed Rs.12, 000 per annum and restricted to two
children in any case. This measure will result in a reduction of revenue of Rs.7 crores
in a full year and a little over Rs.4 crores in 1975 -76.
 1.15 At present, income from live-stock breeding and poultry and dairy farming
is exempt from income-tax. This exemption is prone to abuse by showing income
which would otherwise be chargeable to tax as exempt income. I, accordingly, propose
to restrict the exemption to Rs.10, 000 in a year. This will mean an additional revenue
of Rs.2 crores in a full year and Rs.1.2 crores in the financial year 1975-76.
 1.16 I propose to exempt from income-tax retrenchment compensation paid
to workmen under the Industrial Disputes Act or other similar laws up to a maximum
of Rs.20,000.
 1.17 There are at present certain income-tax exemption limits applying to
salaried assessees relating to house rent allowance and leave travel concessions. These
are being liberalised. Indian technicians employed abroad are also proposed to be
given some tax relief.
 1.18 In order to simplify and rationalise the procedure for assessment of foreign
shipping enterprises, the accounts of which are not easily accessible, I propose to
provide that the income of such enterprises shall be taken at 7.5 per cent of the
aggregate of their gross earnings from traffic originating in India and other earnings
received in India. This change is also in line with the practice in some other countries.
 1.19 At present, contributions made to an approved gratuity fund are allowed
as deduction in computing the taxable income. A doubt has been expressed that, under
the relevant provisions as presently worded, provisions made in the books of account
by taxpayers would also qualify for deduction. This is clearly not the intention. Since
the employer continues to have control over these funds, I propose to provide
specifically that no deduction for tax purposes will be allowed in respect of such
provisions made to provide for future gratuities.
 17

 1. 2 0With a view to curtailing ostentatious expenditure in business and
professions, I propose to deny depreciation in respect of imported cars which are
acquired after 28th February, 1975. Simultaneously, I propose to allow full depreciation
in respect of indigenous cars, irrespective of their cost.
 1.21 At present, trees standing on agricultural land do not qualify for exemption
from wealth-tax. In order to encourage planting and conservation of trees, I propose to
exempt the value of trees standing on agricultural land from wealth-tax, except in
respect of orchards and plantations.
 1. 22 Under Corporation Tax, the full year effect of the proposals is Rs.14.0
crores and the yield for 1975-76 will be Rs.10.5 crores. As a result of the concessions
given, there will be a net reduction of Rs.13.0 crores under income-tax in a full year
and Rs.9.0 crores in 1975-76. The impact of this reduction in 1975-76 on the Central
revenues will be Rs.2. 26 crores.
 II
INDIRECT TAXES
 2.1 I now come to my proposals relating to Indirect Taxes.
 2.2 While I have had to impose levies covering a wide range of commodities,
I have done my best to reduce to the minimum the burden that would fall on lie more
vulnerable sections of the community. It has also been my endeavour to select items
which largely figure in the pattern of consumption of the more affluent sections of
society. I have also attempted to select those commodities which are significant in our
export efforts so that consumption is thereby reduced in the home market releasing an
export surplus which would earn us valuable foreign exchange.
EXCISE DUTIES
 2.3 The recent spurt in the price of sugar in the international market provides
us an excellent opportunity to increase our exports of this commodity, even at some
sacrifice. With a view to reducing consumption of sugar for less essential uses and
releasing more quantities for export, I propose that the Basic excise duty on free sale
sugar may be stepped up from 30 per cent ad valorem to 37-1/2 per cent ad valorem.
I do not propose to make any change in the present effective rate of duty an levy
sugar, which now accounts for 65 per cent of the total internal releases, so that the
average citizen is assured of his quota of sugar at a reasonable price. The proposed
increase in duty on free sale sugar will yield an additional revenue of Rs.30.25 crores.
 2.4 Khandsarl Sugar is at present chargeable to a duty of 17.5 per cent ad
valorem. However, there is a scheme of compounded levy under which Khandsari
sugar units opting for the scheme pay a fixed sum by way of duty for every week of
working, depending on the number and size of the centrifuges used by them. As the
compounded levy results in a disproportionately low duty incidence on these Khandsari
 18

units in comparison with the incidence on regular vacuum pan sugar mills, I propose
to withdraw the compounded levy scheme. All the Khandsari units will, hereafter,
work under the normal Central Excise procedure and pay duty at 17.5 per cent ad
valorem. From this proposal I expect to raise an additional revenue of Rs.19.60 crores.
 2.5 The duty on tea produced in the various Zones has remained unchanged
for the last five years. Tea prices both in the Indian and London auctions have
substantially risen during this period. I, therefore, propose to increase the existing
basic duty m loose tea produced in Zones 1, 11, IV and V by 10 to 15 paise per kg. Tea
of Zone III at present bears the highest rate of duty and there is need for giving some
relief because of the low yield and the high cost of cultivation. As more than 90 per
cent of the Tea produced in this Zone is exported and since the price increases in
respect of these teas have been the least, I propose to reduce the present basic duty for
this Zone by 10 paise per Kg. Apart from bringing in revenue, the proposed increase
in duty on Teas of Zones I, II, IV and V will help in making more -tea available for
export. With a view to ensure that the increase in excise duty on tea does not hit
exports, I also propose to raise the ceiling limit on the quantum of rebate admissible
for exported teas under the present scheme from the existing level of 75 paise per
kilogram to 85 paise per kilogram. The net effect of the proposed changes will bean
additional revenue of Rs.3.40 crores.
 2.6 Cement is another potential foreign exchange earner, and for similar
reasons, I propose to step up the basic duty m cement from 30 per cent ad valorem
to 35 per cent ad valorem. This proposal will yield an additional revenue of
Rs.15.95 crores.
 2.7 The import of crude petroleum and petroleum products continues to
demand a large share of the total available foreign exchange resources. I feel that so
long as energy shortages persist, there is a case for making petroleum products more
expensive so as to promote greater economy and efficiency in their use. Against this
background, the duty on motor spirit is proposed to be raised by 10 paise per litre.
I also propose to increase the duty on furnace oil to induce replacement of oilfired
equipment by coal-fired equipment. Such a duty will be an added reason to replace
obsolescent equipment with modern efficient units, even in installations which
continue to use oil. However, taking into consideration its use by various industries,
the increase proposed is modest - a little less than 3 paise per litre. Low Sulphur
Heavy Stock used for electricity generation will, however, continue to be exempt as
at present. These levies on petroleum products will together yield an additional
revenue of Rs.26. 00 crores.
 2.8 There has been a fall in the proportion of aluminium of electrical
conductor grade produced in recent years compared to the commercial grade. Since
it is of paramount importance that there should be no shortage of aluminium of
electrical conductor grade required by various power systems, I propose to increase
 19

by Rs.2 000 per tonne the excise, duty on commercial grade aluminium thereby
providing encouragement for greater production of electrical conductor grade
aluminium. The proposed increase in duty on aluminium will yield an additional
revenue of Rs.15. 00 crores.
 2.9 I shall now turn to a product on which all Finance Ministers have had to
rely heavily namely, tobacco and its products. The Tobacco Excise Tariff Committee
has recommended a uniform tariff rate for all forms of non-flue-cured unmanufactured
tobacco, other than that used for the manufacture of cigarettes, supplemented by a low
rate of excise duty on certain specified tobacco products namely, biris and chewing
tobacco sold under a brand name, and snuff. Following the Committee’s
recommendation, I propose to levy a uniform total excise duty of Rs. 3 per kilogram
on non-flue-cured unmanufactured tobacco other than that used for the manufacture
of cigarettes. This will mean A reduction of Rs.1. 60 per kg. in the total duty for biri
tobacco, and of Re. 0. 25 per kg. for hookah, chewing and snuff tobacco. However, in
the case of stalks I propose to fix the duty at Rs.2 per kg. against the present rate of
Rs.0.65 per kg. There is already a duty of Rs.3.60 per thousand on biris manufactured
with the aid of machines. I now propose to levy a duty of Re.1 per thousand on
handmade biris also p of which 80 paise will be in the form of Basic duty and 20 paise
in the form of Additional excise duty in lieu of sales-tax. For the sake of administrative
convenience, this levy will be restricted to biris sold under brand names. The duty on
machine made biris will be correspondingly stepped up from Rs.3.60 to Rs.4.60 per
thousand. It will be noticed that those smokers who are not unduly discriminating and
are content with unbranded handmade biris which bear no excise duty should benefit
from the reduction in duty on biri tobacco. I also propose to levy a duty of 10 per cent
ad valorem on chewing, tobacco sold under brand names and on snuff. An exemption
to the extent of 5 per cent will, however, be provided in respect of chewing tobacco
whose value does not exceed Rs.10 per kg. If the smokers of branded biris are called
upon to pay more, equity requires that those smoking pipes and cigarettes should not
be denied the privilege of helping the developmental effort. Accordingly, I propose to
raise the effective duty on cigarettes also. The effective Basic duty on cigarettes is
now 85 per cent ad valorem, if the value of the cigarettes does not exceed Rs.10 per
thousand, and increases by 3 per cent ad valorem for every additional rupee or part
thereof in excess of Rs.10 per thousand. This duty will be increased by 5 per cent ad
valorem at all price levels except that the ceiling level of Basic duty will continue to
remain at 250 per dent ad valorem, Similarly I also propose to raise the Basic effective
duty on smoking mixtures by 5 per cent ad valorem. On account of the rationalisation
of duty on unmanufactured tobacco there will be a reduction of revenue to the extent
of Rs.8. 25 crores. But the net additional revenue from tobacco and tobacco products
will be Rs.26. 88 crores.
 2.10 Both for raising revenues and as a measure of rationalisation I propose to
readjust the rates of duty on rayon and synthetic yarns (including blended yarns), and
 20

on rayon or artifical silk fabrics. I propose to shift partially the burden of excise duty
on artsilk fabrics from the fabric stage to the yarn stage, since collection of revenue at
the yarn stage is administratively easier and Provides fewer loopholes. The additional
excise duty levied on artsilk fabrics in lieu of sales-tax, and the handloom cess, will
continue to be levied at the fabric stage; but there will be no basic excise duty on
artsilk fabrics except in the case of those fabrics whose value exceeds Rs.15 per sq.
metre. This will result in a loss of revenue of Rs.22 crores; to neutralise this loss, and
to earn additional revenue, I propose to increase the duty on rayon and synthetic yarns
suitably. I also propose to levy a new duty of Rs.20 per kg. on textured yarns in
addition to the duty leviable on base yarn used in their manufacture, and to withdraw
the existing concessions on knitted fabrics. No increase is proposed on tyre cord yarn
and on glass yarn which go into industrial production, and on wastes.
 2.11 I, propose to raise the existing duties on superfine and fine cotton yarns
which are used by the composite mills, by powerlooms, and in the hosiery and sewing
thread sectors of the cotton textile industry. As a sequel to increase in the rates of duty
on cotton yarn I also propose to raise suitably the rates of compounded levy paid by
composite mills on cotton yarn and mixed yarn used by them. In order that the increases
in yarn duty may not hit the handlooms, the duty on yarn cleared from the mills in the
form of straight reel hanks used mostly by the handloom sector is being kept unchanged.
 2.12 In 1973 Government appointed a High Powered Study Team to examine
in depth the problems of the Handloom Industry. This body has observed in its report
that powerlooms are in a Position to undercut handlooms in their legitimate market,
and has recommended that the compounded levy on powerlooms may be fixed at
Rs.300 per powerloom per annum irrespective of the number of looms in a unit. The
matter has been carefuly examined by Government and I now propose to increase the
compounded levy an powerlooms to Rs.2 00 per loom per annum on all those units
with less than 50 powerlooms each.
 2.13 There are reports that some mills take undue advantage of existing
concessional rates of duty prescribed for clearance of fents and rags. With a view to
eliminate this abuse, a two-tier duty structure is proposed to be introduced for cotton
fents and rags, the lower level applying to fents and rags cleared up to a prescribed
limit, and the higher level, to clearances above that limit. The various proposals m
textiles will yield an additional revenue of Rs.49.10 crores.
 2.14 Although air conditioners already carry a duty of 75 per cent ad valorem,
I propose to raise this level to 100 per cent ad valorem. I similarly propose to raise the
duty on parts of refrigerating and air conditioning plants and machinery from 100 per
cent ad valorem to 125 per cent ad valorem. Duty on refrigerators, and refrigerating
machinery and appliances, as well as Air coolers, is however being kept unchanged.
Parts of refrigerating machinery for cold storage plants, hospitals and factories also
will continue to pay the present concessional duty# I further propose to raise the Basic

 21

duty on Cosmetics and Toilet preparations from the present rate of 3 0 per cent ad
valorem to 40 per cent ad valorem. Since this item also carries an Auxiliary duty of 50
per cent of the effective Basic duty there will be a total increase of 15 per cent ad
valorem in the duty. Shampoos will also henceforth pay a Basic duty of 40 per cent.
 2.15 Those blessed by fortune to have enough cash and other valuables with
them to necessitate the purchase of safes and strong boxes cannot legitimately complain
against my next proposal which is to raise the duty on safes, strong boxes and similar
articles from 10 per cent ad valorem to 20 per cent ad valorem. The combined revenue
effect of my proposals for increase in duty on air conditioners and parts, cosmetic and
toilet requisites and safes, strong boxes and the like will be Rs.7.65 crores.
 2.16 As a revenue measure, I propose to increase by 5 per cent the effective
duties on synthetic organic dye-stuffs and synthetic organic derivatives, chinaware
and porcelainware, and glass and glassware, except laboratory glassware. I also propose
to make some changes in the existing basis for grant of duty concession to small scale
manufacturers of chinaware and porcelainware, but these changes will be made effective
only from 1st April, 1975. My proposals regarding synthetic organic dyestuffs, glass
and glassware and chinaware and porcelainware will yield an additional revenue of
Rs.10. 20 crores.
 2.17 I propose to increase the duty on packing and wrapping paper, pulp boards
and duplex and triplex boards from 80 paise per kilogram to Rs.1.20 per kilogram.
This will yield an additional revenue of Rs.9.80 crores.
 2.18 I propose to increase the present effective duty on electric wires and.
cables, excluding those used for telecommunication and high voltage transmission
lines, by varying rates ranging between 2-1/2 and 5 per cent ad valorem. I also propose
to raise the duty on electric fans marginally, but there will be no increase in the duty
on industrial fans. The proposed increases in the duty on electric wires and cables and
fans will yield an additional revenue of Rs.4.30 crores.
 2.19 Rationalisation of the tariff entries and exemption notifications relating to
gramophones, record players, tape-recorders, permanent magnets, vehicular tyres,
components of motor vehicles, wool tops, concessions for the use of rice bran oil and
minor oils in the manufacture of soap, and of cotton-seed oil in the manufacture of
vegetable products has been proposed. I also propose to rationalise the tariff for exposed
cinematograph films, and to increase the differential between coloured films on the
one hand and black and white films on the other. All these measures will yield an
additional revenue of Rs.6.84 crores.
 2. 20 To remove doubts about the meaning of the expression “skelp % I propose
to add an explanation at the end of Tariff item 26AA and to validate past levies,
assessments and collections of duty in accordance with this explanation.
 2.21 As there is a substantial difference between the imported cost of graphite
electrodes and anodes and the indigenous cost of production, I propose to levy an
 22

excise duty of 15% ad valorem on graphite electrodes and anodes. This will yield a
revenue of Rs.1.50 crores.
 2.22 I now come to a new concept in Central Excise taxation, Hitherto the
Central Excise tariff covered only certain specified goods. With a view to widen the
coverage of taxable goods and to provide a more dependable, information base for
future revenue raising exercises, I propose to introduce a new item in the Central
Excise Tariff Schedule which,, with a few exceptions, will cover all do produced for
sale or other commercial purpose not elsewhere specified in the Schedule. Goods
covered under this new item will be chargeable to a nominal duty at the rate of 1 per
cent ad valorem. While the tariff item will cover the production of all factories as
defined. in the Factories Act, 1948 I propose for the sake of administrative convenience
to exempt the production of those factories which employ not more than 49 workers
in the case of power-operated factories, and not more than 99 workers in the case of
non-power operated factories. To further simplify the levy, I also propose to exempt
from duty intermediate products and component parts falling within this item produced
in a factory and consumed within the. same factory for the manufacture of finished
goods. No countervailing duty will be levied on imported goods corresponding to this
new item. This levy is admittedly an experimental measure. I expect that this measure
will yield a revenue of Rs.24. 00 crores per annum.
 2.23 The auxiliary duty of excise levied under the Finance Act of 1974 valid
up to 31st of March, 1975 is being continued up to 30th of June, 1976. Mainly on
account of the increase in the basic duty proposed on some items there will be additional
accrual of auxiliary duty also, estimated at Rs.5.34 crores. This amount, however , has
been included in the Revenue Estimates under the respective items already mentioned.
 2.24 The total effect of all the above proposals relating to Central Excise will
be an additional revenue of Rs.250.47 crores. Of this the Union Government’s share
will be Rs.194.81 crores and the States’ share Rs.55.66 crores.
IMPORT DUTIES
 2.25 I do not propose any revision of the Customs Tariff rates. But considering
the trend of international prices of non-ferrous metals I propose to increase the
countervailing duty on copper by Re.3500 per tonne and on zinc by Rs.2125 per
tonne. These changes will yield an additional revenue of Rs.24.50 crores.
 2.26 The increase in Central Excise duty on certain items which I have proposed
earlier will lead to a consequential. increase of Rs.9.55 crores in the collection of -
countervailing duty on imports.
 2.27 The auxiliary duty of Customs levied under the Finance Act of 1974
is being continued up to 30th of June, 1976 and the effective rates of this levy
remain unchanged.
 2.28 The various proposals which I have made will yield an increase of Rs.34.05
crores in Customs revenue.

 23

 2.29 The yield for 1975-76 for the Centre, taking Union Excise Duties and
Customs Duties together will be Rs.228.86 crores.
CENTRAL SALES TAX
 2.30 Before 1 conclude 1 should mention a proposal which I am making to
raise resources for the benefit of the States and Union Territories. The rate of Central
Sales-tax on inter-State sales of goods is being raised from 3 per cent to 4 per cent
with a corresponding change in the ceiling prescribed in respect of local Sales-tax on
goods declared to be of special importance in inter-State trade or commerce. As a
result of this proposal being made effective from 1st July, 1975, the additional
collections for those Union Territories whose revenues form part of the Consolidated
Fund of India will amount to Rs.1.75 crores in the year 1975-76. The States will
benefit to the extent of Rs.38.25 crores in 1975-76 through this measure.
 III
 3.1 To sum up, so far as the Union Budget is concerned, the various
proposals imply, for 1975-76, additional revenue aggregating Rs.239 crores. The
budgetary gap of Rs.464 crores, as indicated earlier, will accordingly be scaled
down to Rs.225 crores.
 3.2 The budgetary deficit has thus been kept at a modest level. With the
improving prospects for the availability of food, power and fuel, this order of deficit
is not likely to accentuate inflationary pressures in the economy.
 3.3 My major concern in the formulation of this budget has been to stimulate
production by stepping up the pace of investment in areas crucial to the healthy
growth of the economy. The effectiveness of the measures proposed in achieving the
goals that we have set for ourselves will, however, depend in large measure m the
willingness of the different sections of the community to contribute their utmost to
the common endeavour.
 3.4 Let us all then, in Government, the Legislature and outside, rededicate
ourselves to this national cause at this juncture and conduct ourselves with that
discipline and determination which the occasion demands.
 (February 28, 1975)




 24

