 22. I now come to my proposals relating to indirect taxes. In order to raise the
needed resources, I have no option but to increase Central Excise duties selectively. In
doing so, it has been my endeavour to keep to the minimum the impact on the poorer
sections of the community. I have also tried to raise duties on those items where the
 5

middleman is today retaining a large margin, to the detriment of both the consumer
and the primary producer. These duties will help to mop up unintended gains accruing
to the trade.
 23. At present copper and copper alloys in crude form, and wire bars, wire
rods, etc., carry a basic excise duty of Rs.1500. 00 per metric tonne. Specified
manufactures of these carry a rate of Rs.2000.00 per metric tonne, while pipes and
tubes are assessable at 10 per cent ad valorem. The international prices of copper have
been soaring. Even now the bulk of our requirements have to be imported. The
indigenous producers of copper have also been selling their products at prices on par
with the prices of imported goods, and thus enjoy a substantial benefit as their own
cost of production is lower. To siphon off a part of this fortuitous profit, I propose to
increase the basic excise duty on copper in crude form and on wire bars, wire rods,
etc., to Rs.4000. 00 per metric tonne; on specified manufactures of these to Rs.4500.00
per metric tonne; and on pipes and tubes to 20 per cent ad valorem. The existing
provisions for collection of duty at the rate of Rs.500.00 per metric tonne on plates,
sheets, circles, strips and foils made out of duty-paid metal, or metal made out of
specified types of scrap will continue. A lower rate has also been fixed for sheets and
circles cleared in untrimmed condition. The provisions for set-off of duty paid on
copper in crude form if used for the manufacture of copper pipes and tubes will also
continue. Through these proposals, I expect to secure additional revenue to the extent
of Rs.8.40 crores, inclusive of the consequential accrual of increased auxiliary duty,
which is determined as a percentage of the effective basic duty.
 24. On similar considerations. I propose to increase the basic duty on
unwrought zinc from Rs. 500.00 to Rs.1500.00 per metric tonne; on specified
manufactures of this from Rs.800.00 to Rs.1800.00 per metric tonne, and on pipes and
tubes from 10 per cent to 20 per cent ad valorem. Zinc plates, sheets, circles, strips
and foils made out of duty-paid unwrought zinc, or specified types of scrap, or their
combination, will continue to pay duty at Rs.300.00 per tonne. The additional revenue
accrual from. this will be Rs.5.07 crores, inclusive of the auxiliary duty component.
Imports of copper and zinc will not, however, be liable to any additional countervalling
duty as a result of the increases now proposed on the basic excise duties.
 25. With the rise in prices of rayon and synthetic fibres and yarn, the incidence
of duty, based on specific rates, has gone down. I, therefore, propose to step up suitably
the specific rates in respect of nylon filament yarn and staple fibre and filament yarn
of cellulosic origin. This will provide an additional revenue of Rs.11.38 crores. The
concessional rate available to nylon yarn for use in the manufacture of fishing nets
and parachute cords will, however, continue. I am also not bringing acetate yarn within
the purview of these increases.
 26. With the objective of reducing the gap in the incidence of the duty at the
yarn stage on fabrics manufactured by the composite mills and the powerloom units,
 6

I propose to raise the specific rates of duty on cotton yarn normally going into the
manufacture of superfine, fine and medium-A fabrics manufactured by powerlooms.
The increased rates will also apply to yarn of corresponding counts used in the
manufacture of hosiery, sewing thread etc. Hank yarn in straight reels used by
handlooms will remain unaffected. These changes will thus provide some stimulus to
the handloom industry. These increases will yield an additional revenue of Rs.9.70
crores. Honourable Members will be happy to know that yarn of lower count groups
normally used in the manufacture of medium-B and coarse fabrics is being left
untouched.
 27. Due to production constraints, shortages have developed in the availability
of tyres, and on certain categories high premia are being charged by the middleman.
As a mopping-up measure, and to raise revenue, I propose to step up by 5 percent the
ad valorem duty on tyres, other than those meant for scooters, motor cycles and mopeds,
which will continue to carry the present concessional rate. This will yield an additional
revenue of Rs.8.8 crores. Tyres and tubes for cycles, and tyres specially designed for
use in animal-drawn vehicles will, however, continue to be wholly exempt.
 28. Honourable Members are aware of the general scarcity of cement, and the
windfall gains being reaped by the dealers.To absorb at least a part of these gains, and
to raise additional revenue, I propose to increase the basic duty on cement from 25 per
cent to 30 per cent ad valorem. Inclusive of the consequential increase in accruals
from the auxiliary duty, this proposal will add Rs.29.37 crores to the revenues.
 29. The present tariff rate of basic excise duty on cigarettes is 200 per cent ad
valorem. By a notification, basic duty has been prescribed at 75 per cent ad valorem,
if the value of the cigarettes does not exceed Rs.10.00 per thousand. In respect of
cigarettes having a value higher than Rs.10.00 per thousand, this duty is increased by
3 per cent ad valorem for every additional rupee or part thereof in excess of Rs.10.00
per thousand. As a revenue measure. I propose to raise the rate of basic duty at the
base point (i.e. cigarettes of which the value does not exceed Rs.10.00 per thousand)
from 75 per cent ad valorem to 85 per cent ad valorem. The incremental rate of 3 per
cent ad valorem for every additional rupee or part thereof in excess of the value of
Rs.10.00 per thousand will, however, continue.
 30. As the ceiling of 200 per cent ad valorem restricts the duty on the more
expensive brands, I also propose to raise this to 250 per cent ad valorem. I would hope
those fortunate enough to afford the more costly brands will feel more virtuous in the
knowledge that they will now be contributing in larger measure to the exchequer. The
additional revenue from my proposals relating to cigarettes will amount to Rs.16.45
crores, inclusive of the increased accrual by way of auxiliary duty.
 31. I also propose to raise the basic duties in respect of pig iron, latex foam
sponge, asbestos cement products and electric lighting bulbs and fluorescent lighting
tubes. These will together yield an additional revenue of Rs.8. 14 crores.
 7

 32. As a measure for raising additional revenue exclusively for the Centre. I
propose to step up the rates of auxiliary duty on steel ingots, and iron or steel products,
from 75 per cent to 106 per cent of the effective basic duty, and that on skelp, tin
plates and tinned sheets from 50 per cent to 70 per cent of the effective basic duty.
Rails and sleeper bars used for railway track will not, however, attract the increase.
These proposals, while bringing the indigenous prices more in tune with the imported
prices of comparable products, will also help to raise an additional revenue of Rs.26.85
crores. These revised auxiliary duties will as hitherto apply only to indigenous
production, and not result in higher countervailing duty on imports.
 33. On certain varieties of cotton fabrics like suiting, gaberdine, furnishing,
blended, embroidered, and impregnated or coated fabrics, I propose for the first time
an effective levy of an auxiliary duty of excise at the rate of 33-1/3 per cent of the
effective basic duty; this will yield an additional revenue of Rs.6. 0 crores.
 34. The specific rates of duties on various categories of paper and paper board
were reviewed and stepped up as a part of my budget proposals presented in February,
1974. Since then the steep increases in the prices of most varieties of paper and board
effected by the industry have brought down considerably, in percentage terms, the ad
valorem incidence of the existing specific duties. I am, therefore, constrained to step
up the duty on various categories of paper and paper board for the second time this
year. I accordingly propose to levy an auxiliary duty at the rate of 33-1/3 per cent of
the effective basic duty on all varieties of paper and paper board. Commoner varieties
of printing and writing paper, not exceeding 65 grammes per square metre, used for
exercise books, text books, etc. and assessed at present at a concessional rate of 15
paise per kilogram are being specifically exempted from the proposed auxiliary duty.
Newsprint and hand-made paper and board will also not be affected. This measure
will result in an additional revenue of Rs.13.20 crores.
 35. In an effort to narrow the gap between the indigenous and imported prices
of plastics, I propose to increase the auxiliary duty of excise from 20 per cent to 40
per cent of the effective basic duty, and thus raise an additional revenue of Rs.9
crores. However, plastics when imported will as hitherto continue to be exempt from
the countervailing duty, equal to the auxiliary duty of excise.
 36. I also propose to increase the auxiliary duty on paints and varnishes from
33-1/3 per cent to 50 per cent of the effective basic excise duty, which will bring an
additional revenue of Rs.1. 80 crores.
 37. Till recently DMT and caprolactam were being imported at high
international prices. The indigenous production of DMT has since started while the
caprolactam unit is expected to go into production shortly. Having regard to the prices
at which these products were imported and as a revenue measure, I propose to levy a
duty for the first time at the rate of 50 per cent ad valorem on caprolactam and 25 per
cent ad valorem on DMT. This is expected to yield a revenue of Rs.12.40 crores. The
 8

proposed levies will not result in countervailing duties on the imported caprolactam
and DMT.
 38. The proposals relating to excise duties will lead to a gain in revenue of
about Rs.166 crores in a full year, of which about Rs.20 crores will accrue to the
States and Rs.146 crores to the Centre.
CUSTOMS DUTIES
 39. The inflationary trends in international prices to which I had referred in
my budget speech in February, 1974 continue. In these circumstances, I have decided
to leave unchanged customs duties proper, though additional revenue to the extent of
Rs.1 crore is expected from countervailing duties consequent on the changes proposed
in Central excise duties.
 40. Where changes are proposed to be effected by issue of notifications
effective from the 1st August, 1974, I shall in due course lay copies of such notifications
on the Table of the House.
 41. Taking Customs and Central Excise duties together and exclusive of States’
share, the additional revenue accruing to the Centre will be of the order of Rs.147
crores in a full year or Rs.98 crores approximately for the rest of the. current financial
year.
 42. The various tax proposals that I have outlined will yield a revenue of
approximately Rs.210 crores in a full year and Rs.123 crores in 1974-75 for the Centre.
The States will also receive Rs.22 crores approximately in a full year and Rs.13 crores
approximately during the current year, as a result of these proposals.
 43. As I stated earlier, the presentation of fresh taxation proposals is not an
ordinary event. The economic compulsions of the current situation do not leave us
with any really viable alternatives. It is in this perspective I would wish the House to
view and to judge these proposals.
 (July 31, 1974)




 9

