 PART B
 30. Sir, I now come to the much awaited and perhaps much dreaded part of
my Budget speech. I trust the Honourable Members will not take me to task if the
proposals I unfold do not fulfil the expectations of dread. With resources available for
the Plan next year of Rs.1544 crores and the proposed Plan provision of Rs.1859
crores, there is a gap in the Centre’s Budget of Rs.315 crores. A deficit of this kind is
usually an invitation to a Finance Minister to sharpen his knife for a major operation
for mobilisation of additional resources. On this occasion, I propose to engage myself
essentially in a minor operation in the nature of plastic surgery-taking out a little
flesh here and adding a little bit there in order to make the tax-system more efficient
and attractive.
 31. A number of radical suggestions for tax reform have been made from time
to time by Honourable Members, individual scholars and associations of labour, trade
and industry. The final report of Shri Bhoothalingam has been received and will be
made available to Honourable Members. The Public Accounts Committee has also
recently made a number of suggestions in this regard; and we are awaiting the
recommendations of the Administrative Reforms Commission. Over the year, I have
given the most anxious consideration to the revision and simplification of the tax
structure, both direct and indirect. While some changes are obviously desirable and
could be introduced without further delay, fundamental changes in the tax system
should not be made without a very thorough study of all the Implications. I am having
such a study undertaken in earnest and am hoping that the climate of the country will
be conducive to the acceptance of more thoroughgoing changes in the next Budget.
DIRECT TAXES
 32. Coming to direct taxes first, my main proposals in the field of corporate
taxation relate to the discontinuance of the ‘dividend tax’ on excess distributions of
equity dividends and a reduction in the surtax on company profits from 35 per cent to

 8

25 per cent. The abolition of the ‘dividend tax, apart from making for simplification,
should improve the climate for equity investment. The reduction in the surtax on
company profits is intended as a spur to efficiency.
 33. I propose to introduce a number of concessions to promote higher
agricultural productivity, particularly by encouraging the efforts of user industries. I
propose to make a provision for the deduction, in the computation of business profits
of companies, of an amount equal to one and one-fifth of the expenditure incurred by
them in providing agricultural inputs, such as, fertilisers, seeds, implements and
pesticides, and extension services, in spheres related to the particular industry in which
the company is engaged. This weighted deduction will be available where the qualifying
expenditure is incurred by the company directly and also through approved associations
or organisations. The development of the seed processing industry occupies high priority
in our agricultural programme. I, therefore, propose to accord to it the ‘priority industry’
treatment.
 34. As part of the measures designed primarily to assist export promotion, I
propose to extend the concession of development rebate at the higher rate of 35 per
cent of the cost of new equipment, to the manufacture of vegetable oils and oilcakes
through the solvent extraction process, processed concentrates for cattle and poultry
feeds and processed fish and fish products. I propose also to provide for the grant of
an Export Markets Development Allowance to taxpayers other than foreign companies
at the rate of one and one-third of the revenue expenditure incurred for the development
of export markets. Further, to encourage export of technical ‘know-how’ and technical
services by Indian companies, I propose to exempt from tax the whole of their income
consisting of dividends, royalties and fees derived through these activities from foreign
companies.
 35. In the field of taxation of personal incomes, I have reached the conclusion
that in the interest of simplification of the tax structure and convenience of taxpayers,
the Annuity Deposit Scheme should be discontinued. Accordingly, I propose that no
Annuity Deposits will be required to be made on incomes arising after the current
financial year.
 36. Last year, as a measure for stimulating investment in equities, Indian
company dividends were exempted from income-tax in cases where the total income
from dividends of the taxpayer during the year did not exceed five hundred rupees. I
propose to extend this concession by exempting the first five hundred rupees of such
dividend income from tax even where the total dividend income exceeds five hundred
rupees in the year.
 37. For several years past the rate structure of tax on personal incomes has
included the levy of separate surcharges in relation to unearned incomes and earned
incomes in excess of specified limits. Under our integrated scheme of direct taxation
which comprises, besides income-tax, an annual tax on wealth and taxes on gifts and
 9

inheritance, I do not see any need or justification for differentiating between unearned
and earned incomes through the levy of surcharges on income-tax, which result in
complications in tax calculations. I, therefore, propose to discontinue the levy of separate
surcharges on unearned and earned incomes. Simultaneously, in order to maintain the
progressiveness of the income-tax, I propose to step up the basic rates of income-tax
on incomes over Rs.1 lakh from the present rate of 65 per cent to 70 per cent on
income in the slab between rupees one lakh and rupees two and half lakhs and to 75
per cent on income above that level. I also propose to step up the rates of ordinary
wealth-tax on wealth in the slab over Rs.10 lakhs by half per cent, that is, from 2 per
cent to 21/2 per cent on wealth between Rs.10 lakhs and Rs.20 lakhs, and from 21/2 per
cent to 3 per cent on wealth above Rs.20 lakhs.
 38. In a situation where both the husband and the wife are tax-payers in their
own right, It would be improper for any outsider to decide as to who is dependent on
whom. At present, we avoid this ticklish question by allowing both parties to claim a
spouse allowance. This still leaves open the question as to who brings more tax benefit
to the partnership through marriage. To eliminate this unintended strain on the
relationship of marriage, I propose to provide that where both the husband and the
wife have taxable incomes, the spouse allowance will be available to neither.
 39. As a measure of relief to totally blind individuals, I propose to provide for
the deduction of Rs.2,000 in the computation of their taxable income.
 40. I also propose to simplify the existing basis of the calculation of tax on
partnership incomes derived from registered firms. This will be done by deducting the
tax borne by the firm itself in computing the partners’ shares in the income of the firm.
At present, we grant rebate of tax at the average rate to the partners on the proportionate
amount of the tax borne by the registered firm. In order to maintain the overall incidence-
of tax, I propose to make a consequential upward adjustment in the rates of tax on
registered firms. Some rationalisation is also being undertaken in regard to rate structure
of tax on the incomes of cooperative societies and Local Authorities.
 41. There are a number of changes I propose to introduce in regard to the
computation of income from house property, deduction for the cost of maintaining a
vehicle by salaried employees, procedure for grant of refunds and withholding of tax
from interest payments.. It is not necessary for me to go into the details of all these
changes which are spelt out in the Explanatory Memorandum on the Finance Bill.
 42. I shall now refer to some of the measures that I propose to introduce for
countering tax evasion and avoidance. In this context, I propose to take steps for
setting up, departmentally, an organisation for valuation of lands, buildings and other
assets. Further, J propose also to have administrative instructions issued to secure
that, as far as possible, the same value is adopted for an asset for the purposes of
income-tax, wealth-tax, gift-tax and estate duty.

 10

 43. Another measure is to classify as short-term capital gains, the gains arising
from the sale or transfer of capital assets within 24 months of their acquisition, as
against the present period of twelve months.
 44. The deductible amount of entertainment expenditure in businesses and
professions is already subject to certain limits. These limits are often circumvented
through entertainment undertaken out of entertainment allowances or ‘expense accounts’
operated by employees. Henceforth, such expenditure will also be brought within the
purview of the limits. The existing restriction in the case of companies on the deductible
expenditure on provision of perquisites, benefits and amenities to their higher-paid
staff will be extended to non-corporate enterprises. An alternative monetary limit of
Rs.1,000 per month for each employee will also be laid down. Further, depreciation
allowance and maintenance expenditure admissible to the employer on residential
accommodation and household equipment such as refrigerators and air-conditioners
provided by him to the employees free of charge, will also be brought within these
limits.
 45. Tax liability is sometimes artificially reduced by diverting profits to
relatives and associate concerns in the form of excessive payments for goods and
services. Claims are also made for deduction of expenses in large amounts shown to
have been paid in cash, often with a view to frustrating investigation as to the identity
of the recipients and the genuineness of the claim. To plug these loopholes, I propose
to provide that payments made in businesses and professions to relatives or associate
concerns will have to pass the test of reasonableness in order to qualify for deduction.
Further, I propose to provide that payments made in amounts exceeding Rs.2,500 after
a date to be notified later will be allowed as a deduction only If these are made by
crossed cheques or by crossed bank drafts.
 46. In order to expedite tax assessments, I propose to reduce the period of
time limitation for completion of assessments in original proceedings for 1969-70 and
later years from four years to two years from the end of the relevant assessment year.
As a corollary to this, the time limitation for making applications for refund of tax
will also be reduced, likewise, to two years from the end of the relevant assessment
year.
 47. I propose to lay down very stringent penalties on those who continue to
avoid taxes by concealing their incomes or wealth. For this, the penalties for
concealment of income or wealth will be stepped up to a minimum of 100 per cent and
a maximum of 200 per cent of the concealed income or wealth. In the case of persons
defaulting in the statutory obligation to deduct tax at source and pay At to the credit
of the Central Government, I propose to provide for punishment of rigorous
imprisonment up to six months and a fine of not less than 15 per cent per annum of the
tax in default, on conviction before a court. Currently, such punishment is only a fine
upto Rs.10 for every day of default.

 11

 48. The changes proposed by me in regard to corporate taxes and the taxes on
personal incomes will take effect prospectively i.e., in relation to incomes on which
advance tax is payable or tax is deductible at source during the coming financial year,
1968-69. Similarly, the proposed increases in the rates of ordinary wealth-tax will take
effect prospectively from the assessment year 1969-70. The discontinuance of annuity
deposits from the coming financial year is expected to bring in, in a full year, additional
tax revenue of the order of Rs.18 crores due to non-deduction of deposits in computing
the taxable income. Other changes in the taxation of personal incomes are likely to
result in a reduction in revenue to the extent of about Rs.4 crores in a full year, leaving
a net gain to revenue of about Rs.14 crores. I have not taken into account the gain to
revenue on account of increase in the rates of wealth-tax as the benefit of It will
accrue only during the financial year 1969-70. Together with the changes in corporate
taxation, which Imply a loss in revenue next year of about Rs.4 crores, the yield from
direct taxes would show an increase of Rs.10 crores next year as a result of all the
changes I have proposed.
 49. Before concluding the subject of Direct Taxes, I should like to add that I
have been impressed with the view expressed in this Honourable House that the medium
of the Finance Bill should not be utilised to make too many changes in the income tax
law. Accordingly, I have brought up only such changes in regard to which delay would
have been inadvisable, leaving out changes concerning structural or administrative
matters to be considered and brought up separately in the course of the year.
INDIRECT TAXES
 50. I now come to indirect Taxes. In keeping with the objective of maintaining
price stability for items of essential consumption, I have maintained the utmost restraint
in proposing changes in excise and customs duties. At the same time, some additional
taxation of items of less essential consumption cannot be avoided. There is also need
to deploy the instrument of indirect taxation for assisting export promotion and Import
replacement. I have also taken the opportunity of removing anomalies and introducing
a measure of rationalisation and simplification.
 51. It is proposed to levy an excise duty on six now commodities, namely,
confectionery and chocolates, leather cloth, embroidery, parts of wireless receiving
sets like valves and transistors, steel furniture and crown corks. The duty on
confectionery and chocolates is proposed at 80 paise per kilogram which is expected
to yield an annual revenue of Rs.2.4 crores. The duty on embroidery and steel furniture
will be at the rate of 20 per cent d valorem which together will yield a revenue of
Rs.5.4 crores in a full year. Leather cloth will bear a duty of 25 per cent ad valorem
yielding an annual revenue of Rs.1.52 crores. On crown corks a duty of one paisa per
piece is proposed which will yield an annual revenue of Rs.1.50 crores. The statutory
rate of duty on valves and transistors is proposed to be fixed at Rs.5 per piece, but the
effective rates at present are being fixed at Rs.3 and Rs.1 per piece respectively by

 12

exemption notification. The likely yield would be Rs.2.90 crores. The new levies on
confectionery, embroidery and steel furniture will be confined to the organised sector
of these industries manufacturing the products with the aid of power. These new
levies will collectively yield a revenue of Rs.13.72 crores in a full year.
 52. Among the commodities which are already excisable, the existing rates of
duty on all varieties of unmanufactured tobacco other than tobacco dust are proposed
to be stepped up by about 10 per cent. On this occasion, I have decided to be Impartial
between the different devotees of nicotine, be they addicted to the humble bidi, hookah
and chewing tobacco or to cigarettes, cigars and the pipe. These increases will yield
an additional revenue of Rs.6.36 crores in a full year. Another item on which increase
has been proposed is jute manufactures of which the rate of basic excise duty on
hessians is being increased from Rs.375 to Rs.450 per tonne and on other manufactures
from Rs.175 to Rs.250 per tonne. These increases will yield an additional revenue of
Rs.4.02 crores in a full year.
 53. My next proposal is to increase the basic excise duty on complete
refrigerators and airconditioners from 20 per cent to 30 per cent ad valorem and that
on component parts from 30 per cent to 40 per cent. This measure will appeal to at
least those Honourable Members who pulled me up in the last Budget session for
overlooking such obvious Items of less essential consumption. The increase in duty on
these Items will yield an additional revenue of Rs.2.40 crores in a full year.
 54. It will be recalled that as a part of the Budget proposals last year the duty
on sized cotton yarn of fine and super-fine counts was increased substantially.
Representations have been received from the powerloom weavers that the burden of
this duty at the weaving stage is rather heavy. It is therefore proposed to re-adjust the
rate structure in such a way that relief is afforded on sized yarn and duties suitably
stepped up at the processing stage of powerloom fabrics. The overall budgetary effect
will only be marginal. It is also being ensured that the incidence of the duty on composite
mill fabrics, handloom fabrics and hosiery remains more or less unchanged. Particular
care is being taken to ace that the handloom sector is left unaffected, and in fact some
relief is proposed to be given to this sector by exempting totally hank yarn in plain
straight reels of new French counts 29 or more but less than 34-the latter being
equivalent to a shade more than 40 British counts. This will involve a loss of about
Rs.10 lakhs in a full year. Representations have also been received from the smaller
producers of aluminium that the effect of the Budget proposals of last year has affected
their profitability adversely. It is proposed to afford some relief to these smaller
producers by reducing the effective duty to the extent of Rs.150 per tonne; this
concession will be available only to those ore-based producers whose clearance of
aluminium and products made out of aluminium had not exceeded 12,500 tonnes in
the previous financial year. The revenue effect of this concession will be a loss of
about Rs.25 lakhs in a full year.

 13

 55. Rationalisation of the existing concessions to certain paper manufacturers
and exemptions applicable to some varieties of paper are being given effect to by
notifications, the overall revenue effect of which will be a nominal gain of Rs.15
lakhs in a full year.
 56. The ceiling rates fixed in the Mineral Products (Additional Duties of
Excise and Customs) Act, 1958 have no w been found to be inadequate. The
over-recoveries in the hands ‘ of the oil companies which have to be appropriated to
the Consolidated Fund through levy of these additional excise duties require a higher
rate of levy. It is accordingly proposed that the ceiling rates in respect of Motor spirit,
Refined diesel oil and Petroleum products not otherwise specified be raised sufficiently
and the effective rates which are fixed by notification issued by the Central Government
stepped up suitably. These changes will yield an additional revenue of Rs.10.13 crores
in, a full year, but the consumers will not be affected as the duties, though recovered
from the oil companies, cannot be passed on by way of price increases to the consumers.
The cumulative effect of all the proposals relating to excise duty will be an additional
revenue of Rs.36.4 3 crores in a full year.
 57. It is proposed to continue the levy of special excise duties at the existing
rates for another year. The provision for levy of regulatory duty of excise in the same
manner as in section 42 of the Finance Act 1967 is being continued though there will
be no levy of this duty at present.
 58. For some time past 1 have been exercised over the administrative burden
on the excise department and the complaints of abuse associated with the existing
system of physical control. I have accordingly decided to extend the system of self-
assessment by the manufacturers, to all manufacturers, big and small, making exception
in respect of a few excisable commodities only which present complications in
assessment or where there is substantial movement in bond. A large measure of trust
will thus be placed in the manufacturers, their declarations and their accounts. Day to
day verification of clearances by Central excise officers will be dispensed with and
replaced by periodical cheek of the self-assessed documents and accounts to ensure
that the amounts due to Government have been properly assessed and paid. This
change in procedure will, however, necessitate certain essential revenue safeguards.
To this end, the penal provisions for unauthorised removal of the goods or other
contraventions of the rules and regulations with intent to evade payment of duty are
proposed to be made more stringent.
 59. I have also reviewed the existing system of control on the tobacco growers
for the purpose of levying excise duty on unmanufactured tobacco. Steps are being
taken by which the need for the excise officers to contact the growers will be
considerably reduced. The excise control on sparse growing areas is also being
simplified.

 14

 60. The levy of local sales tax by the States on goods declared to be of special
Importance in inter-State trade is limited to 3 per cent at present. On a request from
some of the States, suitable amendment is being made in the Central Sales Tax Act
deleting mill-made silk fabrics from this list of goods. This will give the States freedom
to levy sales tax on It without any restriction.
 61. I was reminded last year that in spite of my much discussed aversion to
alcoholic liquors, I had not made any proposals in this regard. I should retrieve my
reputation now; and I propose to increase the Import duty on whisky, brandy, and a
few other alcoholic liquors by about Rs.9 per bottle. I also propose to increase the
Import duty on cloves, cassia and cinnamon by about Rs.12 to 13 per kilogram. There
is a high margin of profit in respect of these spices and their use is confined to the
comparatively affluent sections of the community. The proposals with regard to these
consumer goods will yield an extra revenue of Rs.2 crores.
 62. My next proposal is in regard to chemicals, plastics, synthetic resins and
miscellaneous articles not otherwise specified in the Customs tariff schedule. The
present effective rate of 50 per cent ad valorem is proposed to be raised to 60 per cent
ad valorem with some exceptions. This will yield an additional revenue of Rs.12
crores. The proposed increase is not likely to cause any hardship because the cost of
chemicals is usually, a small fraction of the price of the manufactured article, and
secondly, because imported chemicals are usually not required in the manufacture of
articles consumed by the common man; wherever they are, the existing rate is proposed
to be maintained. Thus, though the tariff item regarding chemicals covers drugs and
medicines too, the present rate on the latter as also on the chemicals and intermediates
required for their manufacture is being maintained by issue of exemption notifications.
Similarly, the existing rate on carbon black and red phosphorus will be continued by
issue of an exemption notification. Further, sulphur, dye intermediates recommended
by the Tariff Commission and various other chemicals, the duty on which had been
specially reduced or exempted wholly in the past, will continue to pay duty at the
existing rates. In this connection I should like to make a special mention of an exemption
that is proposed for chemicals and intermediates used in the manufacture of insecticides,
pesticides and fungicides. Some of these have already been exempted, but it is now
proposed to issue an omnibus exemption notification covering all such chemicals and
intermediates as are not manufactured in the country. This concession is being given
to encourage the use of these products as an aid to agricultural production.
 63. The last proposal on the Customs side is an increase in duty on some of
the iron and steel products which at present carry a specially reduced rate of 15 per
cent ad valorem. This rate is proposed to be raised to 271 per cent add valorem as a
specially reduced rate is no longer justified in view of the indigenous production
which is coming up. The revenue effect of this proposal will be an additional yield of
Rs.1.50 crores in a year.

 15

 64. The special duty of Customs is being continued for another year but a
notification is being issued exempting imported goods from this levy so as to maintain
the status quo. The provision for levy of regulatory duty of Customs in the same
manner as in section 39 of the Finance (No.2) Act, 1967 is being continued though
there will be no levy of this duty at present.
 65. As a result of the proposals relating to excise duties, there will be an
additional yield of Rs.3.80 crores on account of the increased collections under
countervailing duty. The aggregate additional revenue under import duties will be
Rs.19.30 crores.
POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS
 66. I had occasion to mention earlier that the deterioration in the revenue
budget of the Posts & Telegraphs Department this year would be of the order of
Rs.22 crores. The result is that they have not only not been able to pay the due
dividend liability to the General Revenues but have not, also been able to cover
their working expenses this year. The working expenses of the Post Office Branch
have particularly gone up very rapidly due to the increase in staff costs. It has been
agreed that the shortfall of this year and the last two years should be made good
over a period of three years commencing from the next year. On this basis and at
existing tariffs, It is anticipated that the deficit in the revenue budget of the Posts
4-Telegraphs Department next year would be Rs.23.83 crores. Honourable Members
are aware that a Tarill Enquiry Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Mahavir
Tyagi had been appointed to evolve definite principles on which the tariff policy of
the Department might be based. The Committee’s interim report covering the Post
Office Branch has since been received and based on the principles suggested by the
Committee, It is proposed to revise the postal tariffs. The interim report and a
Memorandum showing the proposed changes is being circulated separately along
with the Budget papers and I shall, therefore, mention only the more important
changes. The postage on letters upto 15 grams is proposed to be increased from 15
paise to 20 paise and that for a letter-card from 10 paise to 15 paise and for a post
card from 6 paise to 10 paise. The postage for books, pattern and sample packets
and book packets containing printed books and registered newspapers will also be
raised. The money order commission which is 15 paise per Rs.10 will now be 20
paise per Rs.10 upto Rs.200 and 30 paise per Rs.20 thereafter. The postage charges
for foreign malls will also be revised. The Committee has not yet reported on the
tariffs for other branches, but in view of the loss in the working of the Telegraphs
Branch, It is proposed to make a small increase in some of the inland telegraph
rates. These changes are expected to bring in an additional revenue of Rs.24.70
crores on the Postal side and Rs.1.08 crores on the Telegraphs side in a full year.
The changes would be given effect to from dates to be notified later and are expected
to cover the deficit of the Posts & Telegraphs Department next year.
 16

 67. I might add that 1 have already taken account of the increases in the posts
and telegraphs rates in preparing the Budget Estimates for 1968-69 so that they will
not count towards reduction of the initial deficit of Rs.315 crores. Similarly, the changes
in fares and freights announced by my colleague, the Railway Minister, have also
been taken into account before striking the deficit.
SUMMING UP
 68. To sum up, the additional revenue next year from the measures of taxation
1 have proposed would be Rs.65.73 crores of which Rs.10 crores would be under
direct taxes, Rs.36.43 crores under excise and Rs.19.30 crores under customs. Of this,
a sum of about Rs.15 crores will accrue to the States leaving a balance of Rs.50.73
crores available for the Centre’s Budget. I hope the State Governments will utilise this
addition to their resources for minor irrigation and rural electrification.
 69. On capital account, the abolition of the Annuity Deposit Scheme will
mean a loss to the Central exchequer of Rs.35 crores next year. Part of this loss will
be made up by contributions to the new public provident fund for which I am taking
credit for Rs.10 crores only. There will, therefore, be a net loss on capital account of
the order of Rs.25 crores. The net gain to the Centre’s Budget on revenue and capital
account taken together of all the changes will be of the order of Rs.25 crores so that
the initial deficit of Rs.315 crores goes down to about Rs.290 crores.
 70. Honourable Members may well appreciate the immense reservation with
which I have reconciled myself to a large deficit next year. A number of considerations
have weighed with me. In so far as the Plan outlays are concerned, It is clear that any
further reduction can only lead to dislocation of the progress of continuing schemes
even in critical areas such as agricultural development, fertiliser production and family
planning where we are poised for substantial achievements. We have also to keep in
mind the problem of unemployment among technicians which is already a matter of
concern. Besides, it would be shortsighted to retard the process of recovery by putting
an undue curb on Governmental spending. I am sure that no section of the House
would have commended such an approach. The other alternative was to put up proposals
for massive mobilisation of resources. It is my judgement that this would hurt the
economy and retard the process of growth.
 71. I have done my best to restrict the outlays on Defence and Administration.
I am happy to note the earnestness in all parts of the Defence Services to eschew
every form of avoidable expenditure. I am anxiously awaiting the finalisation of the
Reports of the Administrative Reforms Commission. I need hardly reiterate that
Government would go into the recommendations of the Commission with earnestness
and promptness in order that the objectives of efficiency and economy in administration
can be fulfilled as early as possible.

 17

 72. In estimating the resources at the existing rates of taxation, having been
bitten once, I have assumed a modest recovery in industrial production. If, as I hope,
the modifications in taxation I have proposed succeed in Improving the climate for
saving, investment and export, the economy might revive more vigorously and this
would help in moderating the actual deficit. Honourable Members may rest assured
that I have not changed my belief that we cannot afford to indulge in large budgetary
deficits year after year. If I have reconciled myself to a deficit next year, it is in the
expectation that by assisting the revival of the economy at this stage, we shall be able
to achieve a more satisfactory budgetary balance before long.
 73. No Finance Minister can claim either perfect foresight or absolute wisdom.
But I do feel that the situation is as hopeful as it is challenging. The utmost co-operation,
discipline and even a measure of self-denial by all sections of the community will be
necessary If we are to meet the challenge. I would like to appeal to all the Honourable
Members for their co-operation and constructive suggestions so that, together, we can
turn the present challenge into hope and opportunity for the future. On my part, I can
only assure a continuous watch on Implementation of economic policies and a readiness
to take appropriate action from time to time. In conclusion, It is my earnest hope that
the Budget I have had the honour of presenting today reconciles as best as possible the
variety of concerns that are so anxiously felt in this Honourable House and in the
country as a whole.
 (February 29, 1968)




 18

