 PART B
DIRECT TAXES
 1.1 I now turn to direct tax proposals.
 1.2 As Hon’ble Members will recall, the rates of income-tax on personal
incomes were reduced in 1974 on the basis of a recommendation of the Direct Taxes
Enquiry Committee. While presenting the Budget for 1974-75, my distinguished
predecessor had expressed the hope that the reduction in rates would lead to better tax
compliance. This expectation has been fulfilled and is reflected in the striking increase
in income-tax collections during the last two years. While some other factors including
the relentless drive against tax evaders and other economic offenders have played a
part in improving collections, it is also obvious that the reduction in tax rates has
played a major role in promoting far better tax compliance. The remarkable response
to the voluntary disclosure scheme, where the maximum rate was 60 per cent, lends
considerable support to the judgement that the majority of Indian tax-payers would
prefer to abide by the law and pay taxes as due, provided the tax burden is reasonable.
I, therefore, propose to reduce the rates of taxes on personal incomes and wealth. The
maximum marginal rate of income-tax including surcharge will be reduced from 77
per cent to 66 per cent and will be applicable on the slab of income over Rs.1,00,000
in the case of individuals and Hindu undivided families, other than those having one
or more members with independent income exceeding the exemption limit. I do not,
however, anticipate any loss of revenue on this account, as the whole logic of the
present exercise in rationalisation of tax rates is that it will evoke better compliance
on the part of the assessees.
 1.3 In order to raise resources for financing the Plan and also reduce
inflationary pressures generated by larger disposable incomes in the hands of income-
tax assesses, I, however, propose to continue the compulsory deposit scheme for income-
tax payers for another year. While the rate of compulsory deposit on current incomes
up to Rs.25,000 will remain at the existing level of 4 per cent, the rate on the slab
from Rs.25,001 to Rs.70,000 will be raised from 6 per cent to 10 per cent; on the slab
over Rs.70,000 the rate will be increased from 8 per cent to 12 per cent. Resources to
the tune of Rs.80 crores will accrue in 1976-77 as a result of this measure. The honest
tax-payer who gets some long overdue relief should not grudge this contribution to
national savings.
 1.4 It is well known that the prevailing high rates of wealth-tax provided a
powerful incentive for undervaluation and widespread evasion of taxes. In regard to
wealth-tax, in the case of individuals and Hindu undivided families, other than those
having one or more members with independent wealth exceeding Rs.1,00,000, the

 16

new rate of wealth- tax on the initial slab of net wealth up to Rs.5,00,000 will now be
1
 /2 per cent; 11/2 per cent on the slab from Rs.5,00,001 to Rs.10,00,000; 2 per cent on
the slab from Rs.10,00,001 to Rs.15,00,000 and 2.1/2 per cent on the slab over
Rs.15,00,000. At the same time, I propose to reduce the exemption limit in respect of
wealth-tax in the case of all Hindu undivided families from Rs.2,00,000 to Rs.1,00,000.
The additional wealth-tax currently levied in respect of urban lands and buildings has
lost its rationale in view of the ceiling on urban vacant land and other measures in
regard to urban property, and is proposed to be discontinued.
 1.5 At existing rates, the combined incidence of income-tax and wealth-tax
works out to more than 100 per cent of income at certain levels. The present structure
has been found to be unrealistic. These high rates have not led to any significant
reduction of inequality of income and wealth. On the contrary, they have resulted in
large scale tax evasion, generation of black money, and conversion of visible assets
into invisible ones. It is essential to remove these distortions in the economy. The
reduction in wealth-tax rates should not over a period lead to any loss of revenue. This
rationalisation of tax structure is in the nature of an experiment. It is my hope that
with better compliance on the part of the assessees and more efficient administration,
we can raise more resources.
 1.6 In order to remove the hardship faced by owners of self-occupied property
who are now required to furnish its fair market value in the return of net wealth every
year, it is proposed to freeze the value of one self-occupied house property at the
value adopted for the year in which the property is constructed or acquired by the
assessee, or for the year 1971-72, whichever is later.
 1.7 Hon’ble Members are aware that the Hindu undivided family is often
used as a medium for tax avoidance. I have, therefore, proposed withdrawal of certain
concessions currently available in computing the taxable income of Hindu undivided
families having at least one member with an independent income exceeding the
exemption limit.
 1.8 Authors, playwrights, artists, musicians and actors do not earn steady
incomes over the period of their professional career. In order to enable them to moderate
their tax liability during years when they earn high incomes, I propose to increase the
monetary ceiling limit for these categories in respect of qualifying savings through
life insurance, Cumulative Time Deposits, Public Provident Fund, etc., from Rs.25,000
to Rs.50,000 a year,
 1.9 I shall now deal with the corporate sector. I have already drawn attention
to the sharp increase in capital costs that has taken place. This has not only prevented
faster expansion of capacity, but has also imposed considerable strain on existing
undertakings which are obliged to replace worn-out and obsolete equipment. Unless
the corporate sector is enabled to provide adequately for renewals and renovation,
employment and industrial growth will be jeopardised. Fiscal policy should therefore
 17

be oriented to provide the necessary stimulus for the growth and modernisation of the
corporate sector. I have, therefore, decided to introduce a scheme of investment
allowance for certain priority industries. The present scheme of initial depreciation
allowance will be replaced by a system of investment allowance. The investment
allowance will be allowed at the rate of 25 per cent of the cost of acquisition of new
machinery and plant installed after 31st March 1976 in industries currently qualifying
for initial depreciation. I also propose to extend the list of qualifying industries by
including eight other priority or export-oriented industries, namely, carbon and graphite
products; inorganic heavy chemicals; organic heavy chemicals; synthetic rubber and
rubber chemicals, including carbon black; industrial explosives; basic drugs; industrial
sewing machines and finished leather and leather goods, including footwear made
wholly or substantially of leather. I may, however, draw the attention of the House to
certain basic differences between the investment allowance now proposed and the
earlier development rebate. The investment allowance will be withdrawn and will
become liable to tax if this reserve is not utilised for the purpose of acquiring new
machinery or plant within a period of ten years. No part of it will be available for
distribution as profits. The present scheme of investment allowance will facilitate
investment in priority industries and reduce the dependence of the corporate sector on
public financial institutions.
 1.10 As Hon’ble Members are aware, a surcharge of 21/2 per cent on income-
tax was levied on companies in 1971 at the time of the Bangladesh crisis. In 1972, this
surcharge was raised to 5 per cent. I propose to, exempt those companies which will
deposit an equivalent amount with the Industrial Development Bank of India for a
period of five years, from this surcharge. This measure will ensure that the funds
rotate and are available to the corporate sector for investment. I also propose to reduce
the rates of capital gains tax in respect of long-term capital gains derived by companies.
 1.11 As a result of increase in the interest rates, the return on safe investments
has gone up considerably in recent years. In order to make risk bearing investment in
shares of companies more remunerative, I propose to raise the threshold for the
determination of chargeable profits under the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, 1964
from 10 per cent to 15 per cent of the capital employed. The new threshold will,
however, be reckoned with reference to the owned capital of the company and will
exclude long-term borrowings and debentures.
 1.12 It has been urged that the present high rates of interest have a dampening
effect on investment and production. The present structure of interest rates is an integral
part of our credit policy which has helped in keeping inflationary pressures under
control. However, taking note of the escalation in costs of industrial projects, I propose
to exempt interest received by scheduled banks on long-term loans granted to industry
for the purchase of capital plant and machinery from interest tax levied under the
Interest-tax Act, 1974. As this House will recall, the tax on interest was conceived
essentially as a regulatory measure.

 18

 1.13 The present system of taxation of foreign companies gives rise to several
administrative difficulties and uncertainties. As a measure of simplification, I propose
to levy income-tax at a flat rate of 40 per cent on the gross amount of royalties
received by them from Indian concerns under approved agreements made after 31st
March, 1976. Lump sum payments received by such companies for providing technical
know-how outside India under approved agreements will be charged to tax at a flat
rate of 20 per cent of the gross amount received by them. Royalties and technical
service fees received by foreign companies under existing agreements will continue to
be charged on the existing basis, subject to the modification that the expenditure
incurred for earning such income will be limited to 20 per cent of the gross payments.
 1.14 Dividends received by foreign companies will be charged to tax at a flat
rate of 25 per cent on the gross amount of such dividends. Further, head office expenses
allowable as deduction against Indian profits will be subject to specified ceiling limits.
. The deduction on account of such expenses will broadly be limited to 5 per cent of
the Indian income.
 1.15 With a view to simplifying the procedure for taxation of the income of the
Life Insurance Corporation of India, I propose to provide that the taxable profits of
life insurance business will be taken at the figure of the annual average of the surplus
disclosed by the actuarial valuation made in accordance with the Insurance Act, 1938.
Such profits will be charged to tax at the rate of 121 per cent.
 1.16 There is acute shortage of housing, particularly of the kind required by
the poorer sections of the community. House construction is entitled to be treated as
a major industry in its own right. Apart from fulfilling the basic human need for
shelter, it generates considerable employment, both direct and indirect. increased activity
in this sector will also improve the demand for materials like cement, steel and coal
for making bricks. To attract more resources for this neglected but essential purpose,
I propose to exempt new dwelling units put up after 1st April, 1976, with a plinth area
upto 80 sq. meters from wealth-tax for a period of five years. initial depreciation
allowance of 20 per cent will hereafter be available in respect of houses constructed
by employers for use as residences of low-paid employees having annual salary incomes
up to Rs.10,000 instead of Rs.7,500 as at present.
 1.17 As a measure for augmenting foreign exchange resources, I propose to
exempt from income tax, interest payable by industrial undertakings in India on foreign
exchange loans under approved agreements. I also propose to exempt from wealth-
tax, investment by non-resident Indians in equity shares of certain priority and export-
oriented industries. Indians returning from abroad will be exempt for seven years
from wealth-tax in respect of their savings abroad repatriated to India.
 1.18 It is our judgment that the various direct tax concessions will be off-set by
better tax compliance and improved administration.

 19

 II
INDIRECT TAXES
 2.1 I shall now deal with proposals relating to indirect taxes.
 2.2 Before framing this year’s Budget, I had the benefit of consultations with
experts drawn from various fields and representatives of industry and commerce. I am
grateful to them for the several valuable suggestions made by them to which I have
given careful consideration. During the course of the year I have had a detailed review
made of the excise duty structure, which has highlighted certain areas for improvement.
In particular, the feasibility of adopting some form of value added tax has been studied.
Since the issues arising from the studies undertaken are highly complex and have far
reaching effects, I propose to appoint a Committee to review the existing structure of
the indirect tax system and advise the Government on the steps to be taken.
 2.3 I shall now deal with specific proposals relating to excise duties. At present,
excise duties on cotton fabrics are specific and their incidence does not depend on the
price of the fabric. Though the present rates are highly complex and are graded both
on the basis of average counts, and according to the various processes to which cotton
fabrics can be subjected, the burden of excise duties has not been equitably distributed.
There are also considerable difficulties in administering these tariffs in an industry
with many varietal differences. A reform of this system has, therefore, been long
overdue and I have now decided to switch over to a system of ad valorem duties on
cotton fabrics. This will give relief to the weaker and more vulnerable sections of
society who consume lower priced varieties of cloth and will shift the burden to those
who have the ability to pay the higher prices for superior varieties of cloth. I have also
made changes in the definition of superfine, fine and medium A fabrics to stimulate
the use of long staple cotton, the production of which has risen substantially in recent
years. Certain changes have also been made in the duty rates on cotton yarn, and relief
has been given to the handloom and powerloom sectors. At the same time, handlooms
are facing serious competition from powerlooms resulting in a large accumulation of
unsold handloom cloth. We have to provide a measure of protection to the handloom
industry against the competition from powerlooms. I, therefore, propose to increase
the rates of compounded levy on powerlooms. I have taken care to ensure that small
powerloom owners are not affected. The rate on the first two looms in each unit will
therefore remain unchanged. On the next two looms the rate will be raised from
Rs.100 to Rs.125 per loom per year, and on the remaining looms from Rs.200 to
Rs.250 per loom per year. The net result of the rationalisation scheme will be a marginal
gain in revenue of Rs.2 crores.
 2.4 Hon’ble Members are aware that in the textile trade whenever there is a
slight pick up in demand, retail prices are raised without any relation to changes in the
cost of production. The benefit accrues to middlemen at the consumers’ expense.
Cases are also frequent of traders selling at much higher prices than those at which
 20

they purchase from the mills. This results in exploitation of the poorer sections of
society who do not have much choice in purchasing their requirements of cloth and
are not well informed about prevailing market prices. In order to do away with these
obvious malpractices, Government have decided to make it obligatory for the
manufacturers to stamp the maximum retail price on every metre of cloth for sale to
consumers in the domestic market. This decision will be implemented expeditiously.
 2.5 My next proposal relates to paper and paper board, which have been
assessed at specific duty rates for a long time. As a result of this, certain anomalies
have crept in which have been accentuated after price decontrol. I, therefore, propose
to replace the present specific duties on paper and paper board by ad valorem duties.
Printing and writing paper will be subject to a duty of 25 per cent ad valorem and all
other paper and paper board to a duty of 30 per cent ad valorem. I would, however,
like to make it clear that the concessional duty now available to white printing paper
which is supplied by paper mills at the agreed price for various educational purposes,
such as production of text-books and exercise books, and for Government use, will
continue practically un changed. Unbleached and Badami printing and writing paper
*of substance not exceeding 65 gms. Will also be subject to a concessional rate of 15
per cent duty, while existing concessions for newsprint will be continued. The additional
yield from this measure will be Rs.13 crores.
 2.6 The next item on which I propose to step up excise duty is patent and
proprietary medicines. I propose to raise the duty from the existing level of 7.5 per
cent to 12.5 per cent ad valorem. Since this duty will not apply to medicines sold
under pharmacopoeial names and basic drugs, the burden of the increased duty will be
borne only by relatively affluent sections of the society. The additional revenue from
this item will be Rs.18.2 crores. I may also mention that the present lower rate of duty
of 2.5 per cent on life saving drugs and complete exemption admissible to sera, vaccine
and medicinal contraceptives will remain unchanged.
 2.7 I have proposed some readjustments in the duty structure on cigarettes.
With a few exceptions, there will be some relief to cheaper brands of cigarettes and
additional imposition on some other costlier brands. I see no justification for the
privilege enjoyed by the smoker of high priced cigars and cheroots sold under brand
names of being exempt from the purview of the excise levy. I propose to tax these at
the same rate as smoking mixtures. The additional revenue derived from these changes
will be Rs.12.2 crores.
 2.8 I have raised the duty on aerated waters containing blended flavouring
concentrates. There will be no change in the duty on plain soda or aerated waters
which do not contain such blended flavouring concentrates. This measure will yield a
revenue of Rs.8 crores.
 2.9 I am also making some changes in the duty on paints and varnishes, acrylic
fibre and acrylic yarn, certain electronic items and starch. The ad valorem duty on
 21

cement is being converted to a specific duty for administrative convenience. The
revenue implications of these are marginal. A few changes are also being made in the
description of certain tariff items which will not yield any significant additional revenue.
All these changes, when taken together, will yield Rs.9.8 crores.
 2.10 The auxiliary duty of excise levied under the Finance Act, 1975 was valid
upto 30th June, 1976. It is proposed to continue this up to 30th June, 1977.
 2.11 The Finance Minister’s role is not that of a mere tax-gatherer; he has also
to provide relief selectively, when any section of the industry or the consumers is in
serious difficulty. I propose to reduce the duty on non-levy aluminium which is mostly
of the commercial grade by its. 1,200 per tonne. This will, I am confident, improve the
off-take of accumulated stocks by stimulating demand. I also propose to reduce the
duty on artificial and synthetic resins and plastic materials from the present level of
56 per cent to 40 per cent ad valorem. Appropriate relief is also being given to articles
made from these materials. I expect that this step will induce larger production of
these materials. I also propose to reduce the duty on copper by Rs.1,400 per tonne.
This will help to improve the profitability of Hindustan Copper Ltd., a public sector
undertaking, which is the only producer in this field in our country.
 2.12 Our effective action against inflation and black money has resulted in
demand recession in some industries, particularly those producing consumer durables.
Some of these units have already laid off workers causing considerable hardship.
Unless we take remedial action, there is risk of more industrial units closing down or
laying off large number of workers. These industries can diversify into new lines of
production or become competitive abroad only over a period of time. In the meanwhile,
it is essential to enable them to survive by effecting some adjustments in excise duties.
Keeping this in view, I propose to reduce the duty on television sets whose unit value
does not exceed Rs.1, 800 from 20 per cent to 5 per cent ad valorem. I also propose
to give relief to the refrigerating and air-conditioning industry. The duty on medium
sized refrigerators of capacity not exceeding 165 litres is being reduced from 50 per
cent to 40 per cent. Refrigerating and air-conditioning machinery used for industrial,
cold storage and certain preferred purposes will be granted a concessional rate of duty
of 20 per cent which is significantly lower than the existing rates. Relief is also being
given in the case of water coolers. I propose to reduce the duty on passenger cars of
less than 16HP (RAC rating) by 5 per cent ad valorem, and also grant exemption from
duty on tyres, tubes and batteries when these are supplied as original equipment with
the cars.. The duty on jeeps, ambulances, pick-up vans and other vehicles of less than
16HP is also being reduced by 5 per cent ad valorem. Hon’ble Members will be happy
to know that motorised cycle rickshaws are being exempted from excise duty.
 2.13 I propose to reduce the duty on caprolactum from 50 per cent to 25 per
cent ad valorem and make some reductions on viscose and acetate yarns which go into
the production of relatively cheap fabrics. I propose to give relief by way, of excise

 22

duty to a number of common consumer items, viz., house-hold laundry and cheaper
varieties of toilet soap, detergents, and stainless steel blades. With rising living standards
generally, table and pedestal fans of small size are used by almost all sections; so are
dry cells for the ubiquitous transistor and torchlight. I, therefore, propose to give some
relief to these items.
 2.14 As an export promotional measure, I propose to abolish the excise duty
on ready-made garments and to make some adjustments in the tea rebate scheme.
Some relief is also being given to tea produced in Zone HI because of the high cost of
production and the low yield.
 2.15 It has been decided to introduce a new scheme of excise duty relief to
encourage higher production. The scheme visualises grant of relief in respect of selected
commodities to the extent of 25 per cent of duty payable on goods produced in excess
of production in a selected base year. Details of the scheme are now being worked out
and I expect that it will be introduced for one year in the first instance.
 2.16 The effect of changes in excise rates will amount to a net realisation of
only Rs.15.12 crores, after allowing reliefs of the order of Rs.50 crores. Of this, the
additional revenue -ace ruing to the Centre will be Rs.8.’55 crores, while the States’
share will be Re.6.57 crores. I have no doubt that the consumer will welcome the
substantial relief.
 2.17 I now deal with Customs duties. Where I have increased the rates of
Customs duties, I have selected those items which will either give an added impetus
to domestic industry or where large premia prevail, the Exchequer being entitled to its
rightful share.
 2.18 Imported stainless steel sheets have been commanding high premia in the
Indian market, partly because of scarcity and partly because of a large differential
between the prices of imported and indigenously produced stainless steel sheets. I,
therefore, propose to raise the import duty on this item from the present level of 220
per cent to 320 per cent ad valorem. I also propose to raise the import duty on stainless
steel plates and strips from the present level of 75 per cent to 120 per cent ad valorem.
The proposed increases in the import duty on stainless steel sheets, plates and strips
will together yield an additional revenue of Rs.10.60 crores.
 2.19 With a view to encouraging greater production of high carbon and
alloy steel within the country and larger use of indigenously produced iron and
steel, and also as a revenue raising measure, I propose to increase the existing
import duty on high carbon and alloy steel (other than stainless steel) from 35 per
cent to 75 per cent ad valorem. I also propose to modify the existing concession
with regard to countervailing duty on iron and steel and fix countervalling duty
at an amount equal to the basic excise duty. These changes will yield an additional
revenue of Rs.18.40 crores.
 2.20 As there is a wide gap between the international price of copper and the
indigenous price, I propose to increase the import duty on copper. The tariff rate on
copper will be raised from 40 per cent to 100 per cent ad valorem. However, for the
 23

present, I propose to fix the effective import duty on copper at 6 0 per cent ad valorem.
The effective countervailing duty which is now Rs.5000 per metric tonne is being
stepped up to Rs.5600 per metric tonne. Corresponding changes are also being made
with necessary adjustments in the import duty and countervailing duty on copper
scrap and copper manufactures. The propsed changes on copper and copper
manufactures and copper scrap will yield a revenue of Rs.6.65 crores.
 2.21 For similar reasons, I propose to increase the import duty on caprolactum
and Dimethyl terephthalate (D.M.T.) from the present level of 75 per cent to 120 per
cent and to withdraw the exemption from countervailing duty on caprolactum. I also
propose to increase the basic customs duty on acrylic yarn by Rs.20 per kilogram. The
proposed changes in duty on caprolactum, D.M.T. and acrylic yarn will yield an
additional revenue of Rs.12. 85 crores.
 2.22 There are a number of items in the First Schedule to the Indian Tariff Act
in respect of which we have international commitments under the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade to maintain the duty at points not exceeding certain agreed levels.
Since we have recently enacted the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 which follows broadly
the Brussels Tariff Nomenclature, we have obtained a general waiver from the G.A.T.T.
Council in regard to our commitments under the Agreements, pending renegotiation
with the concerned contracting parties. In view of this waiver I propose to withdraw
the exemption enjoyed by certain articles on this account, which will yield revenue of
Rs.3 crores.
 2.23 There are a few areas in which I propose to give some concessions with
regard to customs duties. With a view to encourage new investment in the fertiliser
and newsprint industries, I propose to reduce the duty on machinery and equipment
imported for setting up fertiliser plants and newsprint plants from 40 per cent to 30
per cent ad valorem. The customs duty on imported rock phosphate used for manufacture
of phosphatic and complex fertilisers is also being withdrawn. These measures will
involve a revenue loss of Re. 13.15 crores.
 2.24 On computers and computer sub-systems I propose to reduce the basic
import duty from 60 per cent to 40 per cent ad valorem. I also propose to exempt these
from the whole of the auxiliary duty and countervailing duty. Other items which will
get relief in import duty are polyester films imported for the manufacture of magnetic
tapes, metalised plastic films imported for the manufacture of electronic capacitors,
and sports goods imported for use in national or international competitions. The relief
on all these items together will amount to Rs.1. 75 crores.
 2.25 The auxiliary duties of customs levied hitherto are being continued upto
the 30th June 1977 and the effective rate of this levy will remain unchanged
 2.26 Taking Union Excise duties and Customs duties- together the yield for
1976-77 for the Centre will be Rs.47. 25 crores.

 24

 2.27 I am now left with only two proposals designed almost wholly to raise
resources for the benefit of the States.
 2.28 The rates of stamp duties levied on instruments such as receipts and bills
of exchange mentioned in the Union List have not been changed for a long time. With
effect from 1st June 1976 I propose to raise the rates of stamp duties on certain items.
The proposed changes in the rates of stamp duties are likely to yield an additional
revenue of about Re. 22.57 crores per annum. However, during the next financial year,
the accrual of additional revenue to the States and to the Union would be of the order
of Rs.18. 44 crores and Rs.37 lakhs respectively, because the new rates of duty would
be effective for only a part of the financial year.
 2 29 Another change which I have proposed is the revision in rates of excise
duties on medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol, narcotic drugs and
narcotics as also an amendment of the definition of certain terms including narcotic
drugs and narcotics. The State Governments have pointed out that while State excise
duties on alcohol were raised, the duties of excise on the above medicinal and toilet
preparations have not undergone any change since 1964, and this has led to misuse of
these medicinal preparations. I. therefore, propose to raise the rates of excise duties on
medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol, narcotic drugs or narcotics so as
to yield an additional revenue of about Ra. 7.5 to 8 crores per annum -Out this amount,
about Rs.50 lakhs per annum will accrue to the Union in respect of Union territories
and the balance to the States.
 III
 3.1 The net additional mobilisation of taxes as a result of the various measures
I have outlined will be Rs.48 crores for the Centre and Rs.32 crores for the States. The
Budgetary gap of Rs.368 crores indicated earlier will therefore come down to Rs.320
crores. I propose to leave this gap uncovered. it is my considered judgement that this
order of deficit will not accentuate inflationary pressures in the economy. Nevertheless,
there is an inherent element of unpredictability in the course of economic activity and
we shall continue to keep close and vigilant watch over the economy.
 3.2 There is a tide in the affairs of nations, as of men, which taken at the
flood leads on to fortune. The nation is at the crest of such a tide. The economy is
poised for a surge forward. The Emergency and the New Economic Programme have
ushered in a qualitative change in the economic environment. We must now take
advantage of the favourable factors and inject a new dynamism to programmes of
economic and social development.
 In framing these proposals, I have been guided by our cherished national goal,
enunciated by the Father of the Nation, of ensuring sufficiency for all and superfluity
for none.
 Sir, in all humility, I now commend the Budget for the acceptance of this House.
 (March 15, 1976)



 25

