 PART B
 76. I now turn to my tax proposals for 1989-90.
 77. For most people taxation is vexation. I will only say that we raise resources
through taxation to fulfil a larger common purpose and seek to return to people a
benefit which is greater than the cost they bear.
 78. My budget proposals are guided by the objectives and economic
perspectives I have outlined earlier. More specifically the proposals are oriented to
the following ends:-
 - promoting productive employment,
 - protecting the consumption standards of the poor,
 - discouraging non-essential luxury consumption particularly when it is
 import intensive,
 - providing some relief to middle income taxpayers,
 - maintaining the tempo of industrial modernisation and growth,
 - containing the budget deficit for 1989-90.
 79. Now I turn to the budget proposals regarding the direct taxes.
 80. The Hon’ble Members are aware of the high priority the Government
attaches to creation of productive employment. As I mentioned earlier, a number of
schemes are already being implemented to generate employment in rural areas to
benefit the vulnerable sections of our society. However, we feel that a time has come
for taking initiative to make a substantial dent on the problem of unemployment. To
this end, as already stated, Government proposes to introduce a new intensive rural
employment programme, to be called Jawaharlal Nehru Rojgar Yojana. In order to
 15

mobilise resources for this programme, I propose to levy a surcharge at the rate of 8
per cent. on resident taxpayers with incomes above Rs.50,000/- from assessment year
1990-91. I am sure that those who are privileged to have employment in a society,
where there are so many who are deprived, will not mind this sacrifice in the interest
of creating employment for those not so fortunate.
 81. The Government has maintained stability in the direct tax rates during the
last four years. However, it has often been represented that a 25 per cent. tax at the
entry point discourages many taxpayers in coming to the tax net voluntarily.
Accordingly, it is proposed to reduce the rate of tax for individuals in the entry slab of
Rs.18000-25000 from the present rate of 25 per cent. to 20 per cent.
 82. This House is aware of the fact that in order to mobilise resources to meet
the requirements of the drought in 1987 and its after-effects in 1988, a surcharge on
income-tax and wealth-tax was levied. I do not propose to continue the Wealth Tax
and Income-Tax surcharge from the assessment year 1989-90 and 1990-91 respectively.
 83. The combined effect of the changes that I am proposing with regard to the
employment surcharge and the changes in the rate structure will be such that a person
with a taxable income of below Rs.56,000/- will pay less tax than at present. The
entire burden of additional direct-tax will fall on those with a taxable income above
Rs.56,000/- per annum. The revenue effect of this surcharge will be Rs.500 crores. I
have no doubt that the House will welcome this socially progressive measure.
 84. With a view to curbing conspicuous consumption, I propose to enhance
the rate of expenditure tax under the Expenditure Tax Act, 1987, as applicable to
certain hotels, from 10 per cent to 20 per cent. This will yield an additional Rs.30
crores.
 85. I now come to some measures for providing relief.
 86. To meet the housing needs of the citizens has always been an important
policy objective of the Government. In his Budget Speech for 1987-88, the Prime
Minister envisaged a high priority for the housing sector and had announced the decision
to set up a National Housing Bank. Necessary legislation in this regard has been
passed and the National Housing Bank has become operational. In order to help the
National Housing Bank mobilise resources in its nascent stage, I propose to provide
that the deposits made in the Home Loan Account Scheme of the National Housing
Bank as well as the repayment of housing loan taken from the Bank will qualify for
deduction provided under section 80C of the Income-tax Act. The investment will
also be exempt from wealth-tax subject to the overall ceiling of Rs.5 lakhs. Further,
the taxpayers will now get a tax concession under section 54E on capital gains if the
sale proceeds are invested in the bonds and debentures issued by the National Housing
Bank.
 16

 87. Poultry farming is emerging as an important activity for enhancing nutrition
and providing employment. I, therefore, propose to provide tax exemption to the
income from poultry fanning at the rate of thirty-three and one-third per cent. of such
income. This measure should go a long way in encouraging investment in this area.
 88. Retiring Government employees are often on the look out for investment
opportunities with a good post-tax return. With this view, it is proposed to set up a
deposit scheme in which a retiring employee may invest the whole or part of his
retirement benefits for a block period of three years. The interest on this investment
will be free from income-tax. Further, this investment will also be exempt from
wealth-tax. The present ceiling of exemption of wealth upto Rs.5 lakhs in respect of
wealth in certain specified forms will also not apply to such deposits.
 89. As a measure for providing relief to the widows and heirs of deceased
employees, I propose to amend the provisions of the Income-tax Act, to provide a
standard deduction at the rate of thirty-three and one-third per cent., subject to a
maximum of Rs.12,000/-, for the recipient of family pension also. Similarly, it is
proposed to extend the benefit of deduction of Rs.15,000/-, already available to
permanently physically handicapped persons, to persons who are mentally retarded.
 90. Hon’ble Members are aware that under the Constitution Amendment Act,
1998 the ceiling of tax on professions has been raised from Rs.250 to Rs.2,500 per
annum with the object of enabling the State Governments to raise additional resources.
I hope that the States will take full advantage of this. I propose to provide that this tax
be allowed as a deduction in computing the income under ‘Salaries’.
 91. Following the announcements made in the budget speech for 1988-89,
Government has formulated schemes setting up the Exchange Risk Administration
Fund and issued guidelines for venture capital companies I funds which provide
assistance to new entrepreneurs. In order to extend fiscal support to these funds. I
propose to extend certain tax concessions to them.
 92. Revenue loss, if any. on account of the proposed relief measures is expected
to be made up through be made up through better compliance and better collection.
 93. By a notification of the President issued on 7th November. 1988, the
Income-tax Act stands extended to the State of Sikkim from assessment year 1989-90.
In view of some operational difficulties, I now propose to extend the ‘Income-tax Act,
1961 to Sikkim only from the assessment year 1990-91. The Wealth-tax Act and the
Gift-tax Act have already been extended from 1990-91 assessment year by the Central
Government’s notification.
 94. I shall now proceed to deal with my proposals relating to indirect taxes.
 95. In formulating these proposals, I have been guided by the imperative need
for raising additional resources. In doing so, I have taken care to see that items of
 17

mass consumption are not unduly affected and that the burden falls largely on relatively
affluent sections of the population.
 96. As the House is aware, problems of evasion of excise duties through
undervaluation and related administrative problems have led to specific rather than ad
valorem duties on a large number of commodities. In fact, of the total excise revenue,
about 70% is derived from commodities carrying duties at specific rates. In the case
of many commodities which are subject to specific rates of excise duty, the duty
incidence is at substantially lower than what it was when the specific duties were
fixed originally. There has to be a system whereby all specific rates are revised
upwards periodically keeping in view price increases. I propose to make a beginning
in this regard in this Budget by increasing the existing specific duty rates of a substantial
number of commodities by a modest five per cent of current rates with suitable rounding
off. I hasten to add that I have taken care to ensure that items of mass consumption
are kept outside the purview of this adjustment. The items on which t ‘ here will be
no change in the rates of excise duly include sugar, tea, coffee, petroleum products
like kerosene, diesel and motor spirit, biris, vegetable oils, vanaspati, cotton yarn and
fabrics, jute yarn and fabrics and electric bulbs and fluorescent tubes. Similarly, the
existing exemption for newsprint and specified paper intended for use in the printing
of textbooks or other books of general interest remains unaltered.
 97. It is expected that the upward revision of specific rates will yield an
additional excise revenue of Rs.220 crores.
 98. There are some commodities which are charged to excise duty at specific
rates and which would call for a higher rate of adjustment than what has been proposed
in general. I now come to my proposals in regard to these commodities.
 99. In the case of iron and steel, the specific rates of duty have not been
changed significantly for over a decade now. As a revenue raising measure, I propose
to raise the rates of duty on these items. The duty on pig iron is proposed to be
increased from Rs.80 to Rs.200 per tonne. On steel items other than stainless steel,
such as ingots, billets, bars, rods, etc. presently attracting duty of Rs.365 per tonne,
I propose to increase the duty to Rs.500 per tonne. The duty on certain hot rolled flat
products such as sheets, strips, etc. is Proposed to be raised from Rs.500 to Rs.700
per tonne. In respect of certain cold rolled flat products such as sheets and strips, the
duty is proposed to be raised from Rs.715 to Rs.900 per tonne.
 100. There are certain assessment disputes in the case of forgings and castings
as the duty rates vary depending upon the classification. As a measure of rationalisation
and to prevent such disputes, I propose to levy a uniform rate of duty of Rs.800 per
tonne on steel forgings and Rs.600 per tonne on steel castings.
 101. In the case of stainless steel where the duty incidence is rather low, I
propose to raise the duty on ingots, semifinished products and hot rolled products
 18

from the existing rates to Rs.1000 per tonne and on certain cold rolled products from
Rs.715 per tonne to Rs.1500 per tonne. Stainless steel castings and forgings will also
attract a duty of Rs.1500 per tonne.
 102. Similar duty adjustments are proposed to be made on other iron and steel
items. In the case of dutiable downstream products, MODVAT credit on iron and
steel items would continue to be available.
 103. These measures are expected to result in additional excise revenue to the
tune of Rs.150 crores and customs revenue of Rs.18 crores.
 104. No Finance Minister can resist the temptation of looking to smokers of
cigarettes for augmenting excise revenue. I must confess that L like most of my
predecessors, readily submitted to this temptation. Smokers who do not pay any heed
to the statutory warning to their health should, I feel, at least contribute more to the
health of the national economy. I propose to restructure the duty rates on cigarettes.
While generally the duty rates are being raised, the extent of increase would be more
in the case of filter cigarettes of length above 70mm. However, non-filter cigarettes
of length upto 60 mm will carry a rate of excise duty of Re.1 per packet of 10. These
measures are estimated to yield excise revenue to the tune of Rs.101 crores.
 105. Having revised the duty structure on cigarettes, I would not like users of
pan masala to feel aggrieved that they have been let down. I propose to double the
excise duty presently being levied on pan masala not containing tobacco for the two
existing slabs based on value from Rs.10 and Rs.20 per kg. to Rs.20 and Rs.40 per kg.
respectively. Simultaneously, I propose to increase the excise duty on pan masala
containing tobacco from 25% to 30%. The revenue implication of these measures is
Rs.8 crores.
 106. As the House is aware. molasses is the principal raw material for the
manufacture of liquor. In keeping with its end use, I feel, molasses can bear a higher
incidence of duty than at present. I accordingly propose to increase the excise duty on
molasses from Rs.60 to Rs.120 per tonne. I propose to increase suitably the credit of
money that is presently available when alcohol is used in the manufacture of chemicals.
It is estimated that this measure will yield additional excise revenue to the tune of
Rs.11 crores.
 107. I have a couple of proposals relating to travel tax.
 108. At present, Foreign Travel Tax is being levied at the rate of Rs.50 per
ticket for travel to neighbouring countries and Rs.100 per ticket in respect of travel to
other countries. These rates have not undergone any change since 1979. I propose to
increase the aforesaid rates of tax to Rs.150 and Rs.300 respectively.
 109. As the House is aware, Government has invested substantial sums of money
in developing our airports and providing infrastructural facilities therein. Keeping
 19

this fact in view, the privileged few who can afford to fly within the country should
not mind if they are to pay a small extra amount as tax for augmenting revenues. I
intend to levy a new tax called Inland Air Travel Tax at 10% of the basic fare. However,
I propose to exempt passengers paying air fare in foreign currency. There will also be
a provision for exempting deserving special categories of passengers from this tax.
 110. The proposals relating to travel tax will be given effect to from a date to
be notified later and are expected to yield additional revenue to the tune of Rs.85
crores.
 111. Having dealt with those who fly, I now turn to those who drive. Let me
deal with my proposals in regard to the automobile sector.
 112. As Honourable Members are aware, presently there is a concessional rate
of excise duty of 25% in respect of fuel efficient cars of engine capacity not exceeding
1000 cc and 30% in respect of such cars of engine capacity exceeding 1000 cc as
against the rate of 35% for other cars. I feel fuel efficient cars have established
themselves and there is no necessity to continue with the concessional rates any more.
I accordingly propose to levy a uniform rate of 35% on all motor cars. This rate will
apply to vans and jeeps also. The revenue gain from this measure will be Rs.100
crores.
 113. Currently the excise duty on two wheelers-of engine capacity not exceeding
100 cc is 15% and that on others, 25%, I propose to restructure the excise duty on two
wheelers into a four tier regime. The rate of duty on two wheelers upto 50cc will
remain at the present level of 15%. The duty on two wheelers between 50 and 100 cc
is being raised from 15% to 20%. There is no change in the rate of excise duty of
25% on two wheelers between 100 and 150 cc. The rate of duty on two wheelers
above 150 cc will be 30%. This measure is expected to yield additional revenue of
about Rs.26 crores.
 114. I also propose to give some concessions in customs duties to this sector
keeping in view the need to encourage domestic production and hasten the process of
indigenisation.
 115. I further propose to prescribe a concessional duty of 40% on machinery
imported for the manufacture of fuel injection equipment, which is a vital component
for the automobile sector. The same rate would be applicable to components imported
for manufacture of fuel injection equipment. The concessional rate would be available
only to the units manufacturing under an approved phased manufacturing programme.
 116. The concessions in customs duty to the automotive sector will have a
revenue implication of Rs.19 crores.
 117. I now come to the package of measures relating to the electronics sector.
This is one of the fast growing sectors in our economy and is in a position to contribute
 20

more to the exchequer. My proposals in regard to this sector are oriented to giving a
greater stimulus to the process of indigenisation.
 118. The Members of the House are aware that television has offered
considerable entertainment to our people. It would be in the fitness of things that
television viewers who derive such entertainment should contribute more to the
resources of Government and thereby to the programmes of national development.
 119. At present, black and white television sets of screen size exceeding 15 cm
and upto 36 cm are completely exempted from excise duty. While continuing the
exemption for such sets, I propose to increase the excise duty on the picture tube of
such sets to Rs.200 per tube. Black and white television sets of screen size exceeding
36 cm attract excise duty of Rs.300 per set. I propose to increase this rate to Rs.500
per set.
 120. As regards colour television sets, the present duty is Rs.1500 per set of
assessable value upto Rs.5000 and Rs.2000 per set of assessable value more than
Rs.5000. This duty structure has led to some valuation disputes. Some high value
sets have also entered the market. A review of the duty structure on colour television
sets is therefore called for. I propose to fix a duty of Rs.2250 per set without remote
control, Rs.2500 per set with remote control and Rs.4000 per set having the facility of
‘Picture in picture’.
 121. I also propose to fix a uniform rate of 20% on radios, two-in-ones, cassette
recorders and musical systems, as against the present rates of 15% or 20%.
 122. I propose to increase the excise duty on computers from 10% to 15% ad
valorem. At the same time, computers are being taken out of the general scheme of
exemption for the small scale sector.
 123. Presently, specified raw materials and piece parts imported for the
manufacture of specified electronic components attract customs duty at the rates of
35% and 50% respectively. While extending concessional duty to a larger number of
items, I propose to raise these rates to 40% and 60% respectively.
 124. These proposals relating to electronic items are estimated to yield additional
revenue to the tune of Rs.158 crores in excise and Rs.36.5 crores in customs.
 125. I have some concessions in customs duty to announce for the electronics
sector. In last year’s Budget, a uniform rate of import duty of 100% was provided to
a large number of equipments for telecommunication, satellite communication, data
communication, television transmission and studio and sound broadcasting. I propose
to extend the concession to 35 more specified equipments.
 126. Optical communication cables are essential for telecommunication. In
order to encourage the manufacture of such cables in the country, I propose to reduce
 21

the import duty on specified raw materials required for their manufacture from the
present rates varying from 130 to 300% to the level of 80%.
 127. With a view to encouraging production of high-tech items like large scale
integrated circuits, microprocessors and other microelectronic items, 22 items of
machinery have been given a concessional import duty of 15 %. I propose to extend
the concession to five more items of machinery.
 128. The concessions in customs duty to the electronics sector will have a
revenue implication of Rs.33 crores.
 129. I have a package of measures in regard to the customs duty structure for
capital goods.
 130. At the time of presenting the 1987 Budget, the Hon’ble Prime Minister
had emphasised the importance of the capital goods industry and had stated that it is
central to our efforts for achieving self reliance and to promote the growth of this
sector. Important steps were initiated that year. The success brought forth by these
measures encourages us to continue further along those lines. My first proposal is, to
extend the duty concession for import of machinery under the technology upgradation
scheme for the capital goods industry to four more sectors. These are cutting tools,
commercial tool rooms, textile machinery and paper machinery. In addition, for the
machine tool sector, I propose to expand the list of machinery items attracting
concessional duty.
 131. I propose to rationalise the import tariff of capital goods. The rate of
import duty on general projects and machinery is being reduced from the existing
90% to 80% ad valorem. The rate of duty on components which is 15% below the
rate applicable to the machinery would get correspondingly reduced.
 132. The next step in this regard would be rationalising the rate of concessional
import duty on specified machinery which presently varies between 25% to 35%.
This is being unified and fixed at 40% ad valorem. There would, however, be no
change in the case of fertilizer projects. In the case of power projects, the increase
would be by five percentage points.
 133. The rationale for these changes lies in the desirability of reducing the
dispersion in tariff rates as much as possible. In pursuit of this objective, I am
introducing an intermediate level of duty of 60% ad valorem. This will apply to
certain specified items of machinery which are manufactured indigenously such as
captive power plants, certain types of generating sets and circular looms for jute
industry.
 134. As a measure of facilitating the export thrust sectors to upgrade their
technology by importing modern machinery, concessional duties have been prescribed
from time to time on machinery for specified thrust sectors. I propose to extend the
 22

concession to rubber and canvas footwear sector and to expand the existing list of
machinery for textile and sericulture sectors.
 135. These measures relating to capital goods are estimated to result in a loss
of customs revenue of about Rs.117 crores.
 136. As I have mentioned earlier in my speech, pricing and distribution of
aluminium is being decontrolled with immediate effect. In this context, I propose to
increase the excise duty on aluminium ingots and wire-rods from the existing level of
18% to 20% ad valorem plus Rs.2500 per tonne. Since MODVAT credit in regard to
primary aluminium would be available for dutiable downstream products, I propose to
increase the duty on most of such products by ten percentage points. It is also proposed
to exempt aluminium ingots from basic and auxiliary duties of customs. The basic
customs duty on aluminium scrap is being reduced from 30% to 15%. The net revenue
yield from these measures will be Rs.50 crores.
 137. There are certain commodities which attract a low rate of customs duty at
present and these call for a review. I propose to ram the import duty on wood pulp,
waste paper, low ash coal, raw petroleum coke and certain chemicals by five percentage
points over the existing rates. On benzene, I propose to raise the basic custom duty
from the existing nil rate to 25% ad valorem. The revenue gain from these proposals
will be Rs.39 crores.
 138. I propose to increase the basic customs duty on glazed newsprint from
Rs.550 per tonne to 30% ad valorem. This will yield additional revenue of about
Rs.12 crores.
 139. Watches and components thereof presently bear a low rate of excise duty
of 2% ad valorem. This rate was fixed in order to encourage indigenous production
of watches. This measure has been successful. I think the time has come when the
watch industry can bear a higher duty. I propose to increase the rate to 5% ad valorem.
This will result in a revenue gain of Rs.5 crores.
 140. I shall now deal with my package of proposals in regard to the agrobased
and related industries.
 141. As Honourable Members are aware, the growth of food processing and
packaging industry is essential for increasing value addition of agricultural produce
and raising incomes of farmers. As part of Budget proposals last year, excise duty on
parts and accessories going into the installation of cold storage plants for preserving
foodstuffs was reduced from 40% to 15%. I now propose to extend the concessional
rate of 15% to parts of refrigerating appliances and machinery as well as compressors
intended to be used in refrigerated vans meant for transport of food and dairy products.
 142. At present, 34 specified items of food processing and packaging machinery
enjoy a concessional import duty of 35%. I propose to extend the concessional rate
 23

to a few more specified items of machinery such as transport refrigeration unit and
machinery for egg processing. The concessional rate of duty as stated earlier is now
being fixed at 40%.
 143. I propose to reduce the excise duty on skimmed milk powder and condensed
milk from 15% to 10%. Simultaneously the exemption from excise duty on skimmed
milk powder in one kilogram pack is being withdrawn. The excise duty on certain
other food preparations such as preparations of fish, meat, tapioca and sago in unit
containers is being reduced from 15% to 10%. Namkeens such as bujiyas and chabena
and specified ready-to-cook mixes such as idli-mix and vada-mix are being fully
exempted from excise duty.
 144. A concessional import duty of 61% has been provided for certain specified
items of machinery for marine food sector. I propose to further reduce the rate to 40%
and enlarge the list by adding three more items of machinery for fishing. In addition,
I propose to reduce the import duty on machinery for the manufacture of fish nels
from 90% to 40%.
 145. One of the proposals contained in the New Policy on Seed Development
announced in September, 1988 relates to the reduction of import duty on machines
and equipments used for seed production and processing and quality control for which
technology upgradation is necessary. I propose to prescribe a concessional import
duty of 40% on 12 specified items of such machinery and equipments.
 146. In order to help improve the quality of poultry feed, I propose to reduce
the import duty on two specified amino acids from the present level of 147.25%
to 70%.
 147. To give relief to the jute industry, I propose to exempt from excise duty
jute yam supplied to a registered handloom co-operative society or an organisation set
up or approved by the Government. This exemption will be available for the purpose
of development of handlooms for manufacture of fabrics other than those used for jute
sacks. I also propose to extend this exemption to units set up by the Khadi and
Village Industries Commission and Boards.
 148. Paper and paperboard containing not less than 75% by weight of bagasse
is totally exempted from excise duty. In order to further encourage the use of
unconventional raw materials for the manufacture of paper and thus reduce the pressure
on forest based raw materials, I propose to extend full excise duty concession to those
varieties of paper and paper board which contain not less than 75% of pulp made from
raw jute or mesta. This measure may incidentally help the jute industry.
 149. For helping the farmers to get better prices for their produce, I propose to
increase the basic customs duty on cinnamon from Rs.20 per kg to 90% ad valorem
plus Rs.20 per kg and that on cloves from Rs.60 to Rs.95 per kg.
 24

 150. To give a major thrust to marketing of products of the Khadi and Village
Industries sector, I propose to make an exception in regard to availability of small
scale concession where the products bear the brand name of Khadi and Village Industries
Commission and Boards. The existing concession for products of village industry
marketed by or with the assistance of the Khadi and Village Industries Commission is
being extended to furniture and ceramic products.
 151. These measures relating to agrobased and related industries are estimated
to result in a revenue loss of Rs.5 crores of customs duty and Rs.8 crores of excise
duty.
 152. On a review of the excise duty structure for the match industry, I feel
there is need for revising the duty rates for the different sectors of the industry.
Currently, excise duty is being levied on the mechanised, semi-mechanised,
nonmechanised and cottage sectors of the industry at Rs.5.85, Rs.4.15, Rs.3.50 and
Rs.1.60 per gross of boxes respectively. I propose to bring down the aforementioned
rates to Rs.4.50, Rs.3.00, Rs.2.50 and Rs.1.10 per gross. Simultaneously, I propose to
increase the excise duty on potassium chlorate, an essential raw material for the
manufacture of matches, from 15 % ad valorem which works out to roughly Rs.2 per
kilograrm to Rs.5 per kilogram. The duty rates will be converted into metric system
and specified as applicable to 100 boxes with effect from the 1st June, 1989. These
proposals involve a revenue sacrifice of Rs.11 crores excise duties.
 153. In view of the shortage of cotton due to drought, as part of the Budget
proposals last year, a concessional duty of Rs.5.22 per Kg. was prescribed on viscose
staple fibre for blending with cotton. However, with the increased availability of
cotton this year, there is no further necessity to continue the concession. I propose to
withdraw the concessional rate and fix a uniform rate of Rs.8.35 per Kg. on viscose
staple fibre. The revenue gain from this measure will be of the order of Rs.14 crores.
 154. I propose to exempt raw wool to be imported by Khadi and Village
Industries Commission and State Khadi and Village Industries Boards from the whole
of the duty.
 155. The customs duty on raw silk is being reduced from 75% to 50% ad
valorem.
 156. Dyestuffs are important inputs for the processing of textiles. This
commodity carries at present an excise duty of 35%. I propose to reduce the excise
duty on synthetic organic dyestuffs from 35% to 30%. This proposal which will
benefit this textile related industry involves a revenue loss of Rs.19 crores.
 157. Synthetic shoddy blankets of value upto Rs.60 per square metre are being
exempted from the whole of excise duty.
 25

 158. I propose to give certain concessions in customs duty to specified life
saving drugs and drug intermediates. The proposals in this regard are likely to result
in a revenue loss of about Rs.7 crores.
 159. In order to give relief to cement units using vertical shaft kiln, I propose
to reduce the excise duty on cement manufactured by such units by Rs.100 per tonne
from the general effective rate. This involves a revenue loss of Rs.10 crores.
 160. As a step towards energy conservation, I propose to reduce the excise
duty on high pressure sodium vapour lamps from 15% to 10%. Simultaneously, I
propose to prescribe a concessional import duty of 50% on four specified inputs
forthe manufacture of such lamps.These measures are estimated to result in revenue
loss of Rs.2.5 crores in excise revenue and Rs.5 crores in customs revenue.
 161. There have been representations that the film industry has been adversely
hit by video piracy. I accordingly propose to restructure the excise duty rates on
feature films. As per the revised proposal, the first 30 prints of each feature film
would be eligible for complete exemption from excise duty as against the first 12
prints at present. The rates of duty on subsequent prints are being reduced.
 162. Some of the organisations engaged in the rehabilitation of physically or
mentally handicapped persons undertake manufacturing activity for providing
employment to such persons. Presently, such organisations are eligible for excise
duty exemption only to the extent available for specified goods manufactured in the
small scale sector. I propose to fully exempt such goods produced by these
organisations.
 163. In order to promote safety in chemical industry and environmental control,
I propose to extend concessional import duty of 40% on 25 specified equipments such
as monitoring instruments for toxic and hazardous chemicals or gases, special
incinerating systems etc.
 164. Paraxylene is an important raw material used in the manufacture of DMT
and PTA which in turn are used by the polyester industry. Keeping in view the recent
trends in the international price of paraxylenej propose to reduce the import duty on
paraxylene from 120% to 90%.
 165. There are a few rationalisation and anti-evasion measures relating to
customs and excise duties.
 166. Presently, petro-chemical factories are eligible for certain concessions
including concessional excise duty on naphtha when they are declared as refineries.
The present scheme has been reviewed and I propose to make available the concessions
with certain modifications, without linking the concessions to the declaration of a
factory as a refinery. Simultaneously, I propose to raise the concessional rate of duty
 26

on raw naphtha from Rs.30 to Rs.60 per kl. The orders declaring certain factories as
refineries are being rescinded.
 167. Small scale units are allowed complete exemption from excise duty upto
a value of Rs.30 lakhs in case they manufacture goods falling under more than one
heading of the Central Excise Tariff. I propose to restructure the scheme so that the
exemption upto Rs.30 lakhs is available only if the goods falling under more than one
Chapter of the Central Excise Tariff are manufactured.
 168. The details of the revenue implications of the measures announced are
given in the Explanatory Memorandum to the Finance Bill.
 169. Provision is being made in the Finance Bill for continuance of auxiliary
duty of customs and special excise duty at the existing rates.
 170. Apart from the above proposals, I have proposed certain amendments in
the Finance Bill seeking to effect changes in the excise and customs tariffs. These
amendments are merely enabling provisions and have no revenue significance. Besides,
there are proposals for amendment of some of the existing notifications. In order to
save the time of the House, I do not propose to recount them.
 171. In the aggregate, the proposals in regard to changes in the customs and
excise duties outlined above are likely to yield additional revenue of Rs.863.20 crores
from excise duties and Rs.117.06 crores from customs duties. The concessions and
reliefs announced aggregate to Rs.237.12 crores on the customs side and Rs.71.02
crores on the excise side. The net additional revenue from excise duties would thus
be Rs.792.18 crores. On the customs side, there is a net revenue loss of Rs.120.06
crores. Besides, the changes in the Foreign Travel Tax and the levy of Inland Travel
Tax would yield an additional revenue of Rs.85 crores. Thus, out of the total net
additional yield of Rs.757.12 crores from indirect taxes, the Centre’s share would be
Rs.373.13 crores and that of States Rs.383.99 crores.
 172. The Medicinal and Toilet Preparations Act is an enactment under Article
268 of the Constitution in terms of which duties are levied by the Union but collected
and appropriated by the States. There has been no change in the rates of duties
leviable on medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol, narcotics and narcotic
drugs since 1982. There have been requests from the State Governments that the rates
should be reviewed and revised suitably. While I do not propose to make any changes
in the ad valorem rates, I propose to increase the specific rates by about 50% of the
existing rates. The details of the changes made in the Schedule are given in the
Explanatory Memorandum to the Finance Bill.
 173. Copies of notifications giving effect to the changes in customs and excise
duties effective from 1st March, 1989 will be laid on the Table of the House in due
course.
 27

 174. The modifications proposed by me in direct and indirect taxes are expected
to yield Rs.903 crores to the Centre. Taking this into account the year end deficit for
the next year is estimated at Rs.7337 crores.
 175. Sir, the proposals I have just presented mark, in their totality, a qualitatively
new stage in our continuing quest for social justice. The new employment programme,
which will expand over time, is the people’s own weapon in their struggle to usher in
a society liberated from the shackles of poverty. The budget proposals also reflect
Government’s strong commitment to self-reliance. We are determined to vigourously
implement strategies for export promotion, for modernisation of Indian industry and
for efficient import substitution. Within these basic policy parameters, every effort
will be made to contain imports to reasonable levels. The journey along the path of
development is hard and long. It involves sacrifices. The question is who will make
such sacrifices for future growth and prosperity. The answer of these budget proposals
is clear and categorical. It is the relatively affluent who will have to share a larger
burden so that the weaker and vulnerable sections of society may share in the fruits of
growth.
 176. I commend the Budget to the House.
 [28 February, 1989]




 28

