 PART B
 84. Let me preface my tax proposals by saying that I have set for myself
the goal of augmenting the net tax revenues of the Central government by a healthy
15-16%; I believe that through the measures proposed by me we will attain this
goal.
 85. I shall begin with my direct tax proposals.
 86. The CMP affirms that “the United Front government will continue with
tax reforms and take other steps to augment revenues legitimately due to the
government and to curb tax evasion. I believe that a good tax policy should aim at
moderate rates, a wider tax base, simpler procedural rules and securing greater
compliance. Households and the corporate sector are our best savers; we must
reward them. From another point of view, however, the tax to GDP ratio for the
Central government, which currently is only around 10.5 per cent, needs to increase
to sustain the needs of public investment and social sector expenditure. Moreover,
the proportion of direct taxes should increase in the total tax revenues of the
government.
 87. It is inexplicable that in a country of over 900 million people, only 12
million people are assessed to income-tax and, what is worse, only about 12,000
assessees are in the tax bracket of income above Rs. 10 lakhs. I intend to make a
beginning in widening the tax net by an amendment of Section 139 of the income-
tax Act. My proposal is that residents of large metropolitan cities who satisfy any
of the two following economic criteria, namely, ownership of a four-wheeler vehicle,
occupation of immovable property meeting certain prescribed criteria, ownership of
a telephone and foreign travel in the previous year, should normally fall within the
taxable slabs and should voluntarily file their tax returns. I appeal to them to
cooperate in our endeavour. If anyone fails to do so, the income-tax Department
would serve upon him a notice obliging him to file his return so that taxes, if due
from him could be collected. Those who live in apparent comfort must have the
satisfaction of finding their names in the records of the income-tax Department.
 88. With the same objective, I also propose to introduce a new Estimated
Income Scheme for retail traders. The scheme will apply to persons engaged in the
business of retail trade of any goods or merchandise having a total turnover of less
than 40 lakhs. A trader with a turnover of less than 8 lakhs will stand exempted,
given the present exemption limit. The income of the trader will be estimated at 5
per cent of the total turnover. Assessees who file a return showing income less that
5% of turnover will be required to maintain books of account and get their accounts
audited.
 89. With the aforesaid steps, the existing presumptive scheme under section
115K, popularly known as Rs. 1,400 scheme, which has not yielded the desired
results, being discontinued.
 90. Members may recall that, last July, I had reduced the income-tax rate
for the first income slab from 20 per cent to 15 per cent. It was, I believe, a step in
the right direction. If we look at comparative income-tax slabs in other developing
Asian countries, it will be evident that tax rates in India are still high and constitute
an important reason for tax evasion. It is now widely accepted that moderate rates

 16
of taxation encourage savings, foster growth and motivate voluntary compliance. I
have received wise counsel from many Hon’ble Members. I have, therefore, decided
to lower the rates of personal income-tax across-the-board in a significant manner.
The current rates of 15, 30 and 40 per cent are being replaced by the new rates of
10, 20 and 30 per cent. The rate will be 10 per cent in the first slab of Rs. 40,000
to Rs. 60,000, and 20 per cent in the slab of Rs. 60,000 to Rs. 1,50,000 and 30 per
cent for all income above Rs. 1,50,000.
 91. The new rates are so moderate that there is now little justification for
increasing the exemption limit. However, salaried persons deserve some relief. I,
therefore, propose to increase the limit of standard deduction to Rs. 20,000, which
will, henceforth, apply uniformly to all salaried taxpayers. An employee drawing a
salary of Rs. 75,000 per annum and contributing 10 per cent thereof to the provident
fund would have to pay no tax at all.
 92. During the last meeting of the National Development Council, a
suggestion was made that the government should think of a scheme to harness
‘black money’ for productive purposes. I have balanced the economic and the ethical
arguments. I have considered various options. And I believe that the time is
opportune to introduce a Voluntary Disclosure Scheme. This would be a simple
scheme where, irrespective of the year or the nature or the source of the funds, the
amount disclosed, either as cash, securities or assets, whether held in India or
abroad, would be charged at the revised highest rate of tax. Interest and penalty
will be waived. Immunity will be granted from any action under the income-tax,
Wealth tax and Foreign Exchange Regulation Acts. The date of commencement of
the scheme will be notified separately, but the scheme will end on December 31,
1997. Of the total resources which can be secured under the Scheme, a substantial
part – 77.5 per cent – accrue to the State governments. I hope they will cooperate
in our endeavour in attracting people to avail of this new opportunity being offered
to those who have shied away from paying legitimate taxes in the past. The share
which becomes available to the Central government will go entirely towards financing
the Basic Minimum Services programme and infrastructure needs.
 93. I also propose to give some further relief to our senior citizens. I propose
to increase the rate of rebate available to them to 100 per cent, from the existing
40 per cent, subject to a limit of Rs. 10,000. Thus a senior citizen having an
income upto Rs. 1 lakh would not have to pay any tax. Senior Citizens with higher
incomes will also enjoy this exemption limit but will be taxed above the threshold
level of upto Rs. 1 lakh.
 94. Responding to demands from Chief Ministers, Propose to amend section
80G of the Income-tax Act to provide for 100 per cent deduction in respect of
donations made to the Chief Minister’s Relief Fund or Lieutenant Governor ’s Relief
Fund.
 95. Turning to corporate taxes, I had in my last budget reduced the rate of
surcharge from 15 per cent to 7.5 per cent and had expressed the hope that I
would take a similar step in my next budget. I propose to abolish the balance
surcharge on companies.
 96. Corporates should be encouraged to undertake new investments. Hence,

 17
I propose to reduce the tax rate applicable to both domestic and foreign companies.
The rate for domestic companies will now be 35 per cent and for foreign companies
48 per cent. The reduction in the corporate rates, apart from better compliance,
should impart an added momentum to the growth process, create multiplier
beneficial effects all around and also attract greater foreign investment.
 97. There has also been a demand from the corporate sector that the tax
rate of 30 per cent on royalty and technical services fees payable to foreign companies
is too high and acts as a hindrance to the transfer of technology. I, therefore,
propose to reduce this rate to 20 per cent.
 98. I have received requests from non-resident Indians that the capital
gains tax rate in their case arising on transfer of securities should be at par with
the rate applicable in the case of FIIs. I see merit in their demand and, accordingly,
propose that the rate be reduced from the existing 20 per cent to 10 per cent.
 99. The Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT) on companies, which was introduced
last year, has been the subject of extensive debate. A large number of representations
have been received to repeal – or review – the provisions. The economic rationale
for MAT has, I am afraid, not been altered and I am unable to accept the request
that the provision introduced last year be totally withdrawn. However, there is a
case for a review of the manner in which the tax is charged and collected. I,
therefore, propose to make the following changes in the provisions of MAT:-
 (i) Export profits will be exempt from MAT and will be eligible for full deduction
 under section 80HHC.
 (ii) A system of credit will be introduced in respect of the payment of MAT.
 When a company pays MAT, the tax credit earned by it shall be allowed
 to be carried forward for a period of 5 assessment years and, in the
 assessment year when regular tax becomes payable, the difference between
 the regular tax and tax computed under MAT for that year will be set off
 against the MAT credit available. Thus, at the proposed new rate of
 corporate tax, every company including the zero tax companies, would
 have to pay income-tax of not less than 10.5 per cent on its book profits.
 100. Another area of vigorous debate over many years relates to the issue of tax
on dividends. I wish to end this debate. Hence, I propose to abolish tax on dividends
in the hands of the shareholder.
 101. Some companies distribute exorbitant dividends. Ideally, they should retain
bulk of their profits and plough them into fresh investments. I intend to reward
companies who invest in future growth. Hence, I propose to levy a tax on distributed
profits at the moderate rate of 10 per cent on the amount so distributed. This tax
shall be incidence on the company and shall not be passed on the shareholder.
 102. In order to encourage investments in government securities, called gilts, I
propose to abolish Tax Deducted at Source (TDS) on such securities. I also propose
to include gilts for the higher deduction limit of Rs. 15,000 under section 80L of the
Income-tax Act as is available in respect of income received from the units of UTI
or approved mutual funds.

 18
 103. I have already announced that Telecommunication will qualify as
infrastructure. I, therefore, propose to extend the following benefits to this sector:-
 (i) Tax holiday under section 80 IA;
 (ii) Amortisation of license fees; and
 (iii) Inclusion of investment made in debentures and equity shares of a public
 company providing telecommunication services for the purposes of tax
 rebate under section 88.
 104. In order to encourage the development of tourism infrastructure, I propose
to give a deduction of 50 per cent of the profits in respect of new hotels which are
located in a hilly area or a place of pilgrimage or a specified place of tourist
importance. These hotels will also be exempt from the levy of expenditure tax. In
respect of hotels located in other places, excluding the four metropolitan cities, the
deduction shall be only 30 per cent of the profits.
 105. Taxing financial itermediation goes contrary to the canons of sound public
finance. Today, an interest-tax at the rate of 3 per cent is levied on the interest
income of lending institutions, including banks and NBFCs. I propose to reduce
the levy to 2 per cent and I hope to eliminate this levy progressively. This will help
to keep down the cost of borrowing.
 106. As a measure of simplification, I propose to amend Section 37 of the
Income-tax Act to provide for the removal of artificial disallowance on account of
advertisement, travelling, hotel expenses, entertainment expenses etc. incurred for
legitimate business purposes.
 107. I have also decided to eliminate a number of exemptions which continue to
remain on statute book and have since lost their relevance or rationale. These
include exemptions and deductions under sections 10(15A), 10(26AA), 80GG and
80JJ.
 108. Now, I turn to my indirect tax proposals.
 109. In relation to indirect taxes the CMP has stipulated: “The progress towards
the goal of bringing India’s tariffs in accord with world levels will be measure and
calibrated.”
 110. On more than one occasion, I have stated that we would achieve the
average levels of tariffs prevalent in ASEAN countries by the turn of the century.
This will give time to Indian industry to adjust to these changes. This year’s proposals
should be seen in this background.
 111. I propose to reduce the peak rate of customs duty from 50% to 40%
 112. High levels of customs duties on capital good are inconsistent with our
policy of attracting the best technology. Greenfield investments in large projects
should be globally competitive. I have tried to harmonise the needs of the Indian
industry with the requirements of the capital goods sector. I, therefore, propose a
modest reduction in duty on capital goods from 25% to 20%. This reduced rate of
20% will also apply to project imports. Over the next two to three years these rates

 19
would need to be further adjusted to conform to levels prevalent in other developing
Asian countries.
 113. I also propose to exempt plans, designs and drawings from the levy of
customs duty.
 114. The customs duty on several inputs for the steel industry is being reduced.
I propose to reduce the duty on coking coal (of ash content below 12%) from 5% to
3% and on coking coal of higher ash content, as well as coke, from 20% to 10%. I
also propose to reduce the duty on nickel from 20% to 10%, on ferro alloys from
25% to 20% and on re-rollable steel scrap from 30% to 20%. All these measures
should benefit the steel industry to reduce its cost of production.
 115. Iron and steel products at present generally attract customs duty at 30%.
I do not propose to make any major changes in the duty structure this year.
However, I propose to reduce the duty on Cold Rolled Coils of iron and steel from
30% to 25% to help the engineering industry. I further propose to reduce the duty
on ships brought for breaking from 10% to 5% and on pig iron from 20% to 10%.
 116. I propose to reduce the duty on non-coking coal from 20% to 10%. This will
help the power sector.
 117. Chemicals constitute vital inputs for several down-stream industries
including the small scale sector. I propose to reduce the duty on organic and
inorganic chemicals from 40% to 30%. I also propose to make the following reductions
on certain essential chemicals:
 · On linear alkylbenzene, from 30% to 20%.
 · On methanol, from 30% to 20%.
 · On naphthalene, from 30% to 20%.
 · On phenol, from 30% to 25%.
 · On catalysts, from 30% to 25%.
 118. I also propose to reduce the customs duty on dyes, pigments, paints and
varnishes, glues, enzymes and modified starches from 40% to 30%. These reductions
will significantly benefit our textile industry.
 119. Mr. Speaker, Sir, the scheduled dismantling of quantitative restrictions
under the Multi Fibre Agreement will expose all textile exporting countries to stiff
competition. The Ministry of Textiles have created a “Technology Upgradation Fund”
for both the textile and jute industries to enhance the competitive efficiency of
these sectors. Our textile industry has, therefore, to upgrade its technologies in the
shortest possible time. Last year, I had reduced the customs duty on several kinds
of textile machinery to 10%. In order to improve the quality of our garments for
exports, this year I propose to ad some more processing machines to this category.
However, to mitigate any adverse impact on domestic manufacturers, I have decided
to allow them to import the components and parts of these machinery at a
concessional duty of 10%.
 120. As a relief to the woolen textile industry, I propose to reduce the import
duty on apparel grade wool from 25% to 20%, on wool waste from 30% to 20% and
on woolen and synthetic rags from 30% to 25%. On flax fibre, I propose to reduce
the duty from 30% to 20%.

 20
 121. In order to conserve our forest resources, I propose to fully exempt wood
logs, fuel wood, wood chips, etc. from customs duty.
 122. The spread of “Information Technology” has radically altered conventional
wisdom on growth strategies. I propose several measures to encourage this industry
and to reduce costs. These include:
 · Full exemption to computer software.
 · Reduction on duty on computer parts, other than populated printed circuit
 boards from 20% to 10%.
 · Reduction of duty on cartridge tape drive and digital video disc drive from
 20% to 10%.
 · Reduction on duty on populated printed circuit boards from 30% to 20%.
 · Reduction on duty on integrated circuits from 20% to 10%.
 · Reduction on duty on colour monitor tubes from 20% to 10%.
 · Reduction on duty on colour picture tubes from 35% to 30%.
 · Reduction on duty on parts of cellular telephones and pagers from 30% to
 20%.
 · Reduction on duty on telecom equipment from 40% to 30% and on their
 parts from 30% to 20%.
 123. Ham operators are presently eligible to import specified equipment upto a
value of Rs. 50,000 at a concessional rate of duty. I propose to raise this limit to
Rs. 75,000.
 124. I propose to reduce the duty on watch parts and movements from 50% to
25% and on watch cases of base metals from 50% to 30%. I also propose to reduce
duty on horological materials from 20% to 10%. This will help our watch industry
to further enhance their quality.
 125. We are all concerned about the menace of growing pollution. In order to
help reduce the cost of CNG kits, I have decided to reduce the customs duty on
such kits and their parts from 10% to a modest 5%. Similarly, I propose to reduce
the customs duty on catalytic converters and their parts to 5% from their existing
rate of 25%.
 126. To improve the quality of medical care, I propose to reduce the import duty
on medical equipment from 30% to 20%; on linear accelerators of 15 MeV and
above used for cancer treatment from 10% to 0%; and on ophthalmic blanks for
making spectacle lenses from 50% to 20%.
 127. To promote tourism, I propose to reduce the import duty on specified
equipment required for hotels from 35% to 25% and on specified specialty food
items used by foreign tourists from 50% to 25%.
 128. I also propose to give some relief to the film and photographic industry by
reducing the import duty on cine films and other photographic films from 30% to
25% and on parts of cameras from 50% to 25%.

 21
 129. I propose to reduce the customs duty on baggage from 60% to 50%.
 130. I now come to proposals on central excise.
 131. Our excise structure is far too complex. Till some time ago, we had a
multiplicity of rates, innumerable end-use exemptions and other distortions.
Considerable simplification has taken place. Last July, I promised that within three
years we shall have a four rate tax structure. I find that, in the first instance, it is
necessary to reduce the dispersion in excise rates. I believe that we can eventually
gravitate towards a mean rate around 18%. With this objective in view, I have
introduced three new rates, namely, 8% 13% and 18%. In the process I have done
away with the rates of 20% and 10% (except in the case of some petroleum products).
In the interest of revenue, I have perforce to continue, for the time being, the rate
of 15% which will apply to metals and a few other commodities.
 132. However, the excise duty structure is still punctuated with many exemptions.
All commodities, with some unavoidable exceptions, should be subject to excise
duty at minimum rate. I propose to undertake this exercise in the next year ’s
budget.
 133. Cotton yarn will continue to bear excise duty of 5% only.
 134. I propose to withdraw the exemption in a few cases like jams, jellies,
sauces and soups where I propose to impose a nominal duty of 8% . Similarly, I
propose to levy a duty of 8% on pens and ball point pens exceeding a value of Rs.
100 per piece and on non-power sun glasses. However, writing ink will be free from
excise duty.
 135. On a number of items of mass consumption like biscuits, sugar
confectionery, laundry soap, tooth paste, tooth powder, kitchen and tableware of
glass, and clocks and watches of a value upto Rs. 600 per piece, I propose to
reduce the excise duty from 10% to 8%. A rate of 13% would be applied for watches
and clocks above Rs. 600 per piece and other items machinery and parts, tyres and
tubes of two-wheeled motor vehicles, fluorescent tubes, and computers and parts
thereof. A reduced rate of 13% will also apply to X-ray films, sanitary towels,
napkins for babies and similar sanitary articles.
 136. In respect of a large number of products, I propose to reduce the excise
duty by percentages ranging from 2% to 7% and apply the mean rate. Accordingly,
the mean rate of 18% would be applicable to many commodities including cocoa
and cocoa preparations, instant coffee, sherbats, organic and inorganic chemicals,
paints and dyes, electric wires and cables, toilet soaps, detergents, articles of leather,
synthetic rubber, fibres and blended synthetic yarn, paper and paper board, plywood,
travel goods and a host of consumer durables.
 137. Agricultural and horticultural machinery are fully exempt from excise duty.
I propose to extend the exemption from excise duty to milking machines, dairy
machines and their parts.
 138. In order to revive and give a thrust to the ailing jute industry, I propose to
fully exempt all jute and jute products from excise duty.
 139. At present, import of equipment and consumables by recognized research

 22
institutions is exempt from customs duty. In the interest of the domestic producer,
I propose to allow the purchase of indigenous equipment and consumables by such
institutions free of excise duty.
 140. I also propose to reduce the duties of excise on certain items in order to
bring about a more balanced excise structure on the whole. The changes proposed
are:
 · Reduction of duty on taxis and cars for physically handicapped from 30%
 to 25%.
 · Reduction of duty on polyester filament yarn from 40% to 30%.
 · Reduction of duty on cosmetics and toilet preparations from 40% to 30%.
 · Reduction of duty on glazed tiles from 30% to 25%.
 · Reduction of duty on air conditioner from 40% to 30%.
 141. Mr. Speaker, Sir, smoking in public places is banned in Delhi. The fight
against cancer and respiratory diseases continues. My contribution will be to increase
the excise duty on non-filter cigarettes, not exceeding 60mm in length, popularly
called mini cigarettes, from Rs. 75 per thousand to Rs. 90 per thousand. I have
also increased the duty on other categories of cigarettes. The increase range from
Rs. 20 to Rs. 70 per thousand. There has been no increase in the excise duty on
biris since 1995. I, therefore, propose to increase the excise duty on biris from Rs.
5 per thousand to Rs. 6 per thousand. The impact of this duty change on the retail
price would be only 2 paise for a bundle of 20 biris. As regards cigarettes, the
increase would be 15 times more for every mini cigarette.
 142. The small scale sector makes an important contribution to our overall
production, provides gainful employment and also contributes to our export effort.
It is the declared policy of this Government to free the small scale industry from
the rigours of cumbersome procedures. In line with this objective, I have radically
simplified the scheme of excise duty concessions for the small scale units. I intend
to continue the full exemption for duty on clearances upto Rs. 30 lakhs and upto
Rs. 100 lakhs, if the small scale unit does not avail any modvat credit on duty paid
inputs. The flat rate of duty will be 3% ad-valorem on clearances between Rs. 30 to
Rs. 50 lakhs and 3% ad-valorem on clearances between Rs. 50 to Rs. 100 lakhs.
The flat rate will apply for all specified goods to which the small scale exemption is
applicable. In the revised scheme of exemption, the small scale units will not be
required to maintain complicated records for availing modvat. They will also not be
required to determine the classification of goods.
 143. In order to curb avoidance from payment of duty, I have decided to exclude
a few items like cotton yarn and texturised man-made yarn from the purview of the
SSI exemption scheme.
 144. Mr. Speaker, Sir, while it is our policy to moderate the tax rates and
simplify procedures, the government is equally committed to curb evasion of taxes.
It is reported that in some sectors, like induction furnace, steel re-rolling mills etc.,
evasion of excise duty is substantial and the production is not being reported
correctly. I propose to tackle this problem by introducing collection of excise duty

 23
on the basis of their production capacity. Suitable legislative changes in the excise
law for enabling the implementation of the aforesaid changes are under consideration.
The details of the proposals would be submitted to this House in due course.
 145. The average citizen consumes a basket of commodities. As a result of my
proposals – some increases and many reductions – I believe the basket will carry a
significantly lower tax burden.
 146. The services sector contributes nearly 40% of the GDP. ‘Services’ are products
as much as ‘manufactured goods’. Both must bear taxes. Hence, I propose to
extend the service tax to cover a number of well known services like:
 · Transportation of goods by road;
 · Consulting engineers;
 · Custom house, Steamer and Clearing and Forwarding agents;
 · Air travel agents, tour operators and car rental agencies;
 · Out-door caterers, pandal contractors and mandap keepers;
 · Man-power recruitment agencies.
 147. The proposals on service tax are estimated to yield a revenue of Rs. 1,200
crore in a full year. However, for the financial year 1997-98, I am taking credit for
Rs. 900 crore. I wish to inform the House that in order to improve our national
highways, I propose to utilise the bulk of the proceeds realised from service tax on
transportation of goods by road to augment the resources of the National Highway
Authority.
 148. On the conventional basis, my proposals relating to reduction in customs
duties are estimated to result in a loss of Rs. 2,625 crore in a financial year and,
in the case of excise duties, my proposals are broadly revenue neutral. However,
the buoyancy and the growth momentum that would be imparted to the economy
would more than compensate for our losses computed through the conventional
calculations.
 149. I now have to say something on behalf of my colleague the Minister of
Communications who has made a statement earlier today. A revision of tariffs for
some postal services has become unavoidable. However, in doing so, we have kept
in view the interest of the common man and the role of postal services in meeting
wider social obligations. While there is no change for Registered Newspapers, the
price for ordinary Post Card is being raised to 25 paise and printed Post Card to Rs.
1.50. The price for Inland Letter is also being raised from 75 paise to Re. 1 and for
Envelope from Re. 1 to Rs. 2. Certain other changes are also being effected which
is explained in the memorandum circulated alongwith the budget documents. The
changes will take effect from a date to be notified later. The proposed revisions are
estimated o yield an additional revenue of Rs. 367 crore in a full year and Rs. 305
crore during 1997-98. This modest increase is necessary for the development of
postal services and in partially bridging the deficit on the numerous services being
provided by the Postal Department.
 150. Copies of the notifications giving effect to the above changes in customs
and excise will be laid on the Table of the House in due course.
 151. Mr. Speaker, Sir, as I come to the end of my labours, let me look at the final

 24
outcome. The revenue deficit in 1997-98 is placed at Rs. 30,266 crore or 2.1% of
GDP. The fiscal deficit comes to Rs. 65,454 crore which is 4.5% of GDP. I have not
wavered in my commitment to continue on the course of fiscal correction. With the
support of this House, and as I promised in the CMP, I hope to bring the fiscal
deficit under 4% in the next budget.
 152. Our goal must be to achieve rapid and broad-based growth which alone
can ensure higher employment, better living standards and a humane and just
society. The challenges that we face today are not unique to India. Other countries,
including our friends in Asia, have faced similar challenges. Japan showed the
way. Other Asian countries are surging ahead. And, finally, there is the example of
China, powering its way to becoming the second largest economy in the world.
These countries have shown that with courage, wisdom and pragmatism they can
find their rightful places in the world.
 153. Deng Xiao Peng, to whom we paid homage a few days ago, once said, “From
our experience of these last few years, I is entirely possible for economic development
to reach a new stage every few years. Development is the only hard truth.” India’s
economy has also reached a new stage. Our beloved India is far stronger today
than she was six years ago.
 154. I would appeal to this House, and to the Indian people to heed the call of
Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore:
 Desha desha nadita kari mandrita tabha bheri,
 Aashilo jata birabrinda aashana tabha gheri.
 Deen aagata oyi, Bharat tabu kayi?
 Shay ki rahila lupta aaji shaba-jana-paschatay?
 Louk bishwakarmabhar mili shabar shathay
 (Thy call has sped over all countries of the world
 And men have gathered around thy seat.
 The day is come; but where is India?
 Does she still remain hidden, lagging behind?
 Let her take up her burden and march with all.)
 155. Mr. Speaker, Sir, with these words, I commend the Budget to this august
House.
 [28th February, 1997]

