 PART B
 79. Having taxed your patience so far, now let me turn to other areas of
taxation and reliefs for which you must have been waiting impatiently. Let me begin
with my proposals in respect of direct taxes. I am introducing certain major changes
in the rate structure for personal income-tax with a view to providing relief to low and
middle income groups, and to make the savings linked incentives more equitable for
taxpayers in different income slabs. My first proposal to raise the exemption limit is
in fulfilment of a promise made in the National Front manifesto. I am raising the
exemption limit for personal income taxation from Rs.18,000 to Rs.22,000. Roughly,
one million persons will go out of the tax net as a result of this change. In deciding the
new limit, I have had to balance two conflicting considerations. On the one hand, it is
a fact that the lower income groups have been affected the most by price rise, and
there is a case to raise the exemption limit. On the other hand, an increase in the limit
narrows the tax base and involves substantial loss of revenue as the benefit of the
increase is spread over all taxpayers, and is not confined to the lower end of the
income levels. Experts have often argued that keeping in view our per capita income,
raising of the exemption limit is not justified. However, as I temperamentally prefer to
avoid taking extreme positions, I have chosen the middle course which I believe is fair
and reasonable.
 80. As further measure of relief to the lower and middle income groups, I am
extending the lowest rate of 20% from the present limit of Rs.25,000 to Rs.30,000.
 81. Last year, a surcharge at the rate of 8 per cent was introduced for financing
employment programmes. Dropping this employment surcharge would have brought
into question my irrevocable commitment to employment oriented planning. I, therefore,
have no choice but to continue this surcharge. This will now be applicable beyond
taxable income of Rs.75,000 as against the present limit of Rs.50,000.
 82. As the Honourable Members are aware, the existing schemes of tax
incentive to promote savings are based on deductions from income. A person gets tax
relief at the highest marginal rate of tax applicable to him. Accordingly, it confers
higher amount of tax benefit to a person with higher income vis-a-vis a person with a
lower income. With a view to removing this inequity, I propose to introduce a system
of tax rebate on the gross amount of savings under section 80C. Under the new system,
a person contributing to provident fund, life insurance, National Savings Certificates,
etc. as earlier, will now be entitled to a tax rebate calculated at the rate of 20%, on
such savings. The maximum tax rebate allowable will be Rs.10,000 generally and
Rs.14,000 in the case of authors, playwrights, artists, musicians, actors, sportsmen
and athletes. This is broadly equivalent to she maximum relief available now. All
persons will get the same amount of tax benefit on a given amount of savings,
irrespective of their levels of income. The low income taxpayer will benefit.
 14

 83. Let me illustrate the impact of the above proposals. A person with a salary
income of Rs.3,500 per month, i.e. Rs.42,000 per year, who saves Rs.8,000 per year
in provident fund and insurance presently pays Rs.1,000 per year as tax. Under the
new dispensation, he will not have to pay any tax at all. The upper income group will
have to save Rs.50,000 to get the full relief of Rs.10,000. Under the old system they
would have got the same relief by saving only Rs.39,500. I may mention in passing,
that the new system of a uniform tax rebate will also lead to a substantial simplification
in tax deduction at source by employers.
 84. As a further incentive to save, I propose to increase the limit available for
the savings incentives under section 80CCA from Rs.30,000 to Rs.40,000. Since the
savings under this are on a ‘netting’ principle and are added back to income when
withdrawn, the present system of deduction from taxable income will continue.
 85. In addition to this, the Equity Linked Savings Scheme (ELSS) announced
last year has how been finalised on a ‘netting’ principle. Investment in units under the
Scheme, will be eligible for deduction upto a maximum of Rs.10,000 from the total
income. The annual return on the investment in the units will be eligible for tax
concession under section 80L. On repurchase of the units by the Mutual Funds, the
capital amount representing the cost of the units win be taxed as income in the year of
repurchase and the excess will be liable to tax as capital gains. The Equity Linked
Savings Scheme will eventually replace the present deduction under section 80CC.
Meanwhile, this provision is being extended for investments made upto 31st March,
1991.
 86. In an effort to mitigate in some small measure, the hardship of parents or
guardians of physically handicapped or mentally retarded persons with incomes upto
Rupees sixty thousand per annum, I propose allowing a deduction of Rs.6,000 from
the parent’s or guardian’s total income to cover expenses on medical treatment, training
and rehabilitation of such persons.
 87. I propose to increase the deduction in respect of professional income
from foreign sources, available to authors, playwrights, artists, musicians, actors and
sportsmen including athletes, from the existing rate of 25% to 50% of the income, or
75% of the foreign exchange brought into India, whichever is higher. In the case of
professors, teachers and research workers also, the present provision has been liberalised
to allow deduction of 75% of the foreign exchange brought into India.
 88. I will now make my proposals in regard to corporate taxation. The corporate
sector has often claimed that the rate of Corporate Tax is high and that this inhibits
growth as well as tax compliance. On closer scrutiny, I find that the rate is only
seemingly high, because the system provides too many exemptions. After all the
admissible exemptions and deductions, the effective rate falls drastically. Many large
and high profit making companies had been able to escape the tax net and were paying
zero tax for a long time. That is why the contribution of the corporate sector to tax
 15

revenue was not commensurate with the profits they earned; nor with the needs of
national development. The tax system also tilted the balance in favour of capital
intensive production.
 89. To ensure better tax compliance, I propose a twin strategy. I am abolishing
major incentives like Investment Allowance and Investment Deposit Account with a
view to closing the escape route for the corporate sector to go out of the tax net; and
having closed that route, I propose to fix the tax rate for widely held domestic companies
at 40% with corresponding changes in rates for other domestic companies. This twin
strategy will raise the effective tax rate and will also give substantial additional revenue
of Rs.800 crores.
 90. The only major deductions that will now be permitted are those relating
to foreign exchange earnings and for setting up new industrial undertakings. The
deduction for setting up new industries is being raised from 25 per cent to 30 per cent
in the case of companies and from 20 per cent to 25 per cent for others. The period
during which the benefit can be availed of is being extended from 8 to 10 yew.
 91. With the abolition of the major exemptions, there is a case for also
removing the special provision regarding tax on minimum profits contained in section
115 of the Income-tax Act. Accordingly, I propose to discontinue that provision with
effect from the assessment year 1991-92.
 92. I am also introducing an important change in the taxation of inter-corporate
dividends. At present 60% of the dividend income received by a domestic company
from another is exempt from tax. There is a tendency towards holding of personal
wealth in the form of companies which are in effect closely-held. In order to encourage
genuine investment activity while at the same time discouraging the use of corporate
framework for holding personal wealth, I propose to exempt dividends received by
domestic companies from other domestic companies to the full extent to which they
themselves declare dividends during the relevant period. However, scheduled banks
and public financial institutions would, in substance, continue to be governed by the
provisions of section 80M as they presently stand.
 93. The result of the reform of the corporate tax system proposed by me will
be to increase the buoyancy, simplify the tax structure and make it neutral as between
small and large companies. At the same time, it will provide strong incentive for
export and for investment in new industrial undertakings.
 94. Many small scale industries are organised as partnerships. I propose to
raise their exemption limit from Rs.10,000 to Rs.15,000 and to lower the tax rates
suitably.
 95. Restoration of ecologically degraded areas fulfils the objectives of
employment generation, enhances the supply of fuel wood and fodder and also
contributes to the overall social, economic and environmental stability of the rural
 16

areas. In order to promote afforestation, I propose to extend the provisions of section
35CCB and section 80GGA to taxpayers who contribute to a fund or programme for
afforestation approved by the prescribed authority.
 96. As in the case of personal income tax. I propose to continue the existing
surcharge of 8% on corporate taxpayers also on all incomes above Rs.75,000.
 97. I also propose to make a major change in the taxation of gifts. At present,
gifts are taxed in the hands of the donor, but there is no limit on the amount which a
donee can show as having been received by way of gifts. Because of this, the mechanism
of gifts is used to split up capital and launder black money. Some instances have also
come to notice recently where attempts have been made to explain away wasteful and
ostentatious expenditure on marriage receptions and other functions as having been
financed out of gifts. With a view to curbing such practices, I have decided to substitute
the present gift-tax on donors with a donee based gift-tax. Any person, who claims his
assets or his expenditures as having been financed from gifts, will now be liable to a
gift-tax on a graduated scale. Thus he will have the pleasure of transferring a part of
his bounty as a gift to the exchequer.
 98. The primary purpose of the donee-based gift-tax is not to raise revenue
but to check tax evasion and conspicuous consumption. In order to take care of
legitimate gifts, there will be a basic exemption limit of Rs.20,000 per year. In the
case of total gifts exceeding Rs.20,000 but not exceeding Rs.50,000, gift-tax will be
levied at 20 per cent; for total gifts exceeding Rs.50,000 but not exceeding Rs.2,00,000
at 30 per cent; and for total gifts exceeding Rs.2,00,000 at 40 per cent. In addition, I
also propose to allow for a substantially higher limit of rupees one lakh for gifts
received from all sources by an individual at the time of marriage. Further, gifts
received in foreign exchange through official channels will also be exempt.
 99. I propose to make the new system applicable in respect of gifts made on
or after 20th March, 1990. Consequently, the existing Gift-Tax Act taxing the gifts in
the hands of donors will cease to be operative in respect of gifts made on or after that
date.
 100. Legislation to give effect to this new scheme is proposed to be introduced
during the current session of Parliament.
 101. I do not propose to take up the time of the House with other minor changes
in the Direct Tax Laws.
 102. As I mentioned earlier, there will be a gain in revenue from corporate tax
to the extent of Rs.800 crores. The loss in revenue from income-tax other than corporate
tax after providing for better compliance is expected to be Rs.250 crores. There will,
therefore, be an additional accrual of Rs.550 crores in respect of direct taxes.
 17

 103. Sir, I shall now deal with my proposals relating to indirect taxes. The
main thrust of the proposals is on simplification and rationalisation. Simultaneously,
I have also attempted to mobilise some resources in a manner dud does not hurt the
common man and at the same time helps to curb elitist consumption. A major emphasis
has been on strengthening impulses for growth and exports. Significant changes in
duty structure are also proposed to develop a quality culture in our industry. I have
also not failed to give relief to the deserving sectors, particularly small scale industry,
agriculture and environmental protection. All these measures have been described in
some detail in the Explanatory Memorandum to the Finance Bill and I shall deal
briefly with the more important of these proposals.
 104. Presently, the import duty rates are widely dispersed. With a view to
rationalising the rates and bringing down their multiplicity, the total of the basic and
auxiliary duty rates of customs are being placed in a limited number of slots in the
range of zero to 125% in respect of most items. Further, as a step towards rationalisation
and simplification of the Central Excise Tariff, the duty rates are proposed to be recast
for a large number of goods. Though as a result of the rationalisation, the duty rates
on certain commodities may marginally go up or down, the proposals on the whole are
intended to be broadly revenue neutral. The reduction in 6e number of rates in each
Chapter of the Tariff will simplify assessment. It will be our endeavour to ensure a
measure of stability for the ad valorem rates.
 105. First, I shall take up the proposals which are in the nature of concessions
in customs and excise duties.
 106. Agriculture is a priority area in our framework of development and tax
rates are already kept low on most of the inputs used in this sector. Specified pesticides
and pesticide intermediates enjoy concessional rates of import duty of 70% and 60%
respectively. I propose to reduce the import duty on a few more specified bulk pesticides
and pesticide intermediates to these levels. The proposal involves a revenue loss of
about Rs.16 crores.
 107. In order to encourage the use of rape-seed oil and mustard oil, of which
there is an abundant production in the country, I propose to completely exempt refined
rape-seed oil and mustard oil which are currently attracting excise duty of Rs.750 per
tonne. The revenue loss on account of this proposal is estimated to be Rs.8 crores.
 108. I propose to remove excise duty on pickles altogether in the hope that this
will lend some flavour and spice to my budget.
 109. Excise duty on coffee is presently levied at the rates of Rs.78 and Rs.105
per quintal depending upon the variety. As a measure of relief to the coffee growers,
I propose to reduce the duty to a uniform level of Rs.50 per quintal. This concession
involves a revenue loss of Rs.4 crores.
 18

 110. Marine products constitute a major thrust area of the country’s exports. In
order to make imported prawn feed more economical, I propose to reduce the duty on
this item to 25%. In order to help modernisation of food processing and sea food
industries, I propose to extend the concessional rate of import duty of 40% now
available to certain specified machinery, to a few more items.
 111. With a view to reducing the cost of cattle feed, I propose to completely
exempt molasses used in its manufacture from the whole of excise duty. I also propose
to prescribe concessional import duty of 40% in respect of certain items of equipment
required in cattle breeding and dairying.
 112. I propose to exempt fully foot-valves of certain specifications from excise
duty in order to promote efficiency of agricultural pumps.
 113. Presently, kraft paper and kraft paper-board used for apple packaging in
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir and Uttar Pradesh are exempted from excise
duty, as a measure to conserve forest wealth. I propose to extend this concession to
packaging of all horticulture produce all over the country. This is expected to result in
a revenue loss of Rs.5 crores.
 114. I propose to extend M11 exemption from excise duty to hand made paper
and paper board manufactured by units of Khadi and Village Industries Commission
even when power is used in the process of sheet forming. I also propose to enhance
the value limit for the purposes of excise duty exemption on footwear from Rs.75 to
Rs.100 per pair in respect of such footwear made by units under KVIC as well as
those run with the assistance of IRDP.
 115. In addition to the measures outlined in the earlier part of my speech for
the promotion of small scale sector, I also propose to extend some more fiscal
concessions to this sector. Presently, small scale units are allowed complete exemption
from excise duty in respect of clearance of goods upto a value of Rs.15 lakhs in case
such goods fall under only one Chapter of the Central Excise Tariff. I propose to
increase this value limit to Rs.20 lakhs. The total exemption available to goods cleared
upto a value limit of Rs.30 lakhs, when such goods fall under more than one Chapter
of the Tariff, will remain unchanged. The increase in exemption limit for small scale
units involves a revenue loss of Rs.67 crores. The scheme of notional credit of 5% in
the case of inputs manufactured in the small scale sector is also being continued for
one more year from the Ist April, 1990. Further, the limit of value of clearance of
goods in a financial year for the purpose of obtaining a central excise licence is being
increased from the existing level of Rs.10 lakhs to Rs.15 lakhs. It has also been
decided that the licensed small scale units having value of clearances upto Rs.20 lakhs
in a year will henceforth be required to furnish only quarterly returns of production,
clearance and duty payment. These changes are proposed to take effect from the lst
April, 1990.
 19

 116. In order to reduce the prices of life saving drugs, I propose to exempt
certain finished formulations containing Rifampicin, which is an anti-TB drug, from
central excise duty. Specified bulk drugs which are required for the manufacture of
certain fife saving medicines are also being exempted from customs duty. I propose to
reduce the import duty on certain specified drug intermediates to 90%. These proposals
involve a loss of revenue of nearly Rs.17 crores.
 117. We are all aware of some recent tragedies involving unhygenically packed
intravenous fluids. In order that the pharmaceutical industry is encouraged to employ
latest techniques of aseptic packaging, I propose to reduce the import duty on aseptic
form fill seal machines for use by that industry from the present level of 147.25%
to 40%.
 118. Certain life saving equipments are eligible for complete exemption from
import duty. I propose to extend this benefit to certain specified instruments and
implants for physically handicapped persons. I also propose to give some concessions
in customs duty to components of hearing aids.
 119. I propose to reduce the import duty on homeopathic medicines as well as
on certain inputs for the manufacture of such medicines. This involves a revenue loss
of about Rs.5 crores.
 120. With a view to giving an impetus to industrial production and to boost
exports, I propose to grant some concessions to capital goods and machinery.
 121. There has been a feeling-that our exports are not able to face international
competition due to high cost of imported capital equipment. A scheme is being worked
out for making available to registered manufacturer-exporters the facility of import of
capital goods at concessional rate of duty against suitable export obligation. Broadly,
capital goods upto a specified value limit imported under the scheme would be eligible
to a concessional import duty of 25%. This will be subject to the condition that goods
of a minimum of three times the value of the imported capital goods are exported
within four years from the date of importation., The details of this scheme will be
announced in the new Import and Export Policy.
 122. Concessional import duties have been prescribed from time to time on
machinery required for various export thrust sectors. I propose to extend the concession
to specified items of machinery for rubber belting industry and forged hand tool industry.
The concession involves a revenue loss of Rs.8 crores.
 123. In order to promote investment and strengthen indigenous capital goods
sector, I propose to reduce the excise duty on such machinery on a selective basis by
5 percentage points. This concession will lead to loss of revenue to the extent of Rs.60
crores. I am one of those who believe that the indigenous capital goods sector is
integral to our search for self-reliance. 1 hope, the reduction in excise duty will make
our capital equipment more competitive and spur modernisation.
 20

 124. With a view to encouraging industrial units to invest in quality upgradation
and strengthen quality control, I propose to prescribe a concessional import duty of
40% on specified instruments and equipments. The proposal involves a revenue loss
of Rs.30 crores. Ibis substantial revenue loss is worthwhile in the interest of improving
the quality of indigenous products.
 125. In the interest of better environmental protection and pollution control. I
propose to extend the present concessional customs duty of 40% to some more specified
air and water pollution control equipments. At the same time, I propose to reduce the
excise duty on certain specified pollution control equipments from 15% to 5%.
 126. Heavy investments are required for the upgradation of the facilities
available at the airports. I propose, as a measure of relief, to reduce the import duty on
navigational, communication, air traffic control and landing equipments imported by
the National Airports Authority of India to a level of 25%. The proposal involves a
revenue loss of Rs.7.5 crores.
 127. In order, to promote establishment of telecommunication network in rural
areas, I propose to reduce the excise duty on specified telecommunication equipment
from the existing rate of 20% to 15%. This will lead to a revenue loss of Rs.15 crores.
 128. I propose to reduce the excise duty on dry cell batteries from 35% to
30%. The relief will involve a revenue loss of Rs.10 crores.
 129. It has been represented that film industry is facing difficulties on account
of video piracy. In order to help combat this menace by simultaneous release of prints
in a number of cinema houses, I propose to fully exempt feature films from excise
duty. The proposal would involve a revenue loss of Rs.8 crores. I hope, with this
incentive, the films which had gone into slow motion will regain their lost momentum.
 130. In order to give relief to the newspaper industry, I propose to reduce the
import duty on standard newsprint by Rs.100 per tonne.
 131. As a matter of administrative simplification, I propose to shift the incidence
of excise duty from truck body building activity, which is mostly in the unorganised
sector, to motor vehicle chassis.
 132. Now I move on to a package of proposals relating to the textile industry.
These aim mainly at simplifying and rationalising the tariff structure, minimising the
scope for evasion and ensuring a lower rate of duty for most varieties of cheaper
fabrics. There are essentially two sets of proposals. The first relates to duty
rationalisation at the fabric stage and the second, to changes in excise and import
duties on man-made fibres and yarns as well as the intermediates used to produce
them.
 133. There is a growing concern about the plight of the handloom weaver. It is
widely believed that one of the main causes of the distress is the neutralisation of the
 21

tax concessions given to this sector by wide-spread tax evasion at the processing
stage. There is thus a near unanimous view in favour of transferring the excise duty
from fabrics to yam, which I share. However, in the case of man-made fabric, the
entire duty is by way of additional excise duty in lieu of sales tax. Therefore, any
change in the duty structure can be made only in consultation with the States. I propose
to consult the Chief Ministers shortly in this regard.
 134. A part of the duty on cotton fabrics is, however, in the shape of basic
excise duty. As a first step, I propose to transfer the whole of the basic duty on cotton
fabrics to yarn. As the hank yarn used by handlooms will continue to be exempted, the
price differential between hank yarn and cone yarn would be widened and this should
greatly improve the competitiveness of the handloom sector.
 135. Since at present the additional excise duty at the processing stage cannot
be shifted to yarn without consultation with the States, I have attempted to rationalise
the duty structure on fabrics. The number of slabs in the case of manmade fabrics is
being reduced in a manner that the duty on fabrics becomes more equitable and the
administration of tax laws more efficient. The rationalisation will also, I believe,
greatly reduce evasion and consequently improve realisation.
 136. Let me turn to man-made fibres, yams and the intermediates used to produce
them. Honourable members will recall that duties were reduced substantially on man-
made textiles in 1985 and 1988. While the incidence of taxes was lowered, there have
been complaints that the consumer did not get the corresponding benefit I have thus
tried to revise die duty structure keeping in mind the ability of different sectors to bear
the additional burden. This will also help the competitiveness of the handloom sector
where the dominant fibre is cotton. The major changes I am proposing are:
 - imposition of a basic excise duty of Rs.4.40 per kg. on PTA and Rs.3.60
 per kg. on DMT which will yield Rs.80 crores,
 - increase in the basic excise duty on polyester filament yarn from around
 Rs.50 to Rs.55 per kg. and on nylon filament yam from around Rs.37 to
 Rs.50 per kg. yielding additional revenue of Rs.156 crores,
 - increase in the basic excise duty on viscose staple fibre from around Rs.7
 to Rs.8.50 per kg. leading to a revenue gain of Rs.15 crores,
 - reduction in the basic duty on polyester staple fibre from around Rs.14 to
 Rs.8.50 per kg. involving a revenue loss of Rs.65 crores and
 - some reduction in the basic duties on various polyester blended yams.
 137. In order to ensure a measure of price discipline in this industry, I propose
to reduce import duties,
 - on DMT and PTA from 195% to 150%,
 22

 - on NFY from 130% to 100%,
 - on PFY from 205% to 180% and
 - on VSF from 55% to 40%.
 The revenue loss from these duty reductions will be marginal since actual imports
am not expected to be significant.
 138. Keeping in view the sharp decline in the international price of MEG, I
propose to raise the import duty on this item from 90% to 150%. This will result in an
additional revenue of nearly Rs.48 crores.
 139. Honourable Members may recall that for providing cheap cloth to the
weaker sections of the society and to encourage the development of the handloom
sector, additional excise duty under Textiles and Textile Articles Act was levied in
1978. The present rate of this duty is generally 13.64% of the basic excise duty. In
addition to this duty, a cess at the rate of 2.5 paise per square metre is levied on fabrics
for the purpose of developing khadi and other handloom industries. I propose to merge
both these levies by raising the additional duty from 13.64% to 15% of the basic
excise duty.
 140. There are certain other rationalisation measures relating to textiles including
marginal adjustment of duty rates on acrylic fibre, polypropylene staple fibre and
filament yarn etc., without significant revenue implications.
 141. The jute industry needs encouragement for diversification of its products.
I propose to fully exempt jute blankets, floor coverings, mattings and bleached, printed
and dyed jute fabrics from excise duty. Full exemption available to jute yam supplied
to KVIC units is also being extended to the handicraft sector.
 142. I hope, having relished so far the liberal reliefs, the Honourable Members
will not now grudge some revenue earning measures.
 143. The family members of my smoker friends would, I am sure, be expecting
an increase in the rates of excise duty on cigarettes in the interest of the health of the
smokers. I will not disappoint them. The increase in duty will be 15 paise for the
cheaper cigarettes and 75 paise in the case of costlier cigarettes per packet of ten.
There will be no change in the duty rate on non-filter cigarettes of length upto 60 mm.
1 would hasten to add that I do not propose any change in the excise levy on biris.
This measure is estimated to yield additional excise revenue of Rs.131 crores. I shall
be more than happy if my actual collections are much less due to fall in cigarette
consumption.
 144. Some sympathetic increase in the excise duty rates on pan masala is also
being made to yield additional revenue of Rs.6 crores.
 23

 145. I propose to increase the excise duty on cocoa and cocoa preparations
from 10% to 15%, on jams, marmalades etc. from 5% to 10% and on ice cream from
nil to 10%. The revenue gain from these measures will be of the order of Rs.26 crores.
 146. The House will agree that items used by the affluent sections of the society
must bear a higher burden of levies. I propose to increase the excise duty on certain
items like microwave oven, washing machine, certain sophisticated varieties of audio
systems, video cassette recorder and player, electronic games and relatively high priced
cooking ranges.
 147. I propose to increase the excise duty on motor cars from 35% to 40%.
This measure will yield additional revenue to the tune of Rs.79 crores. I do not propose
to make any change in the excise duty on two wheelers and tractors.
 148. The specific duty rates of excise on refrigerators, air-conditioners of
capacity upto 1.5 tonnes and automotive gas compressors are being increased. I propose
to enhance the excise duty on car air-conditioning parts including those forming the
kit from 40% to 65%. These proposals involve a revenue gain of Rs.14 crores.
 149. Tyres and tubes, except for a few varieties, are currently subject to central
excise levy at specific rates. On these items, owing to recurring increase in prices, the
duty incidence in ad valorem terms has come down. As a corrective measure, I propose
to raise the existing specific rates on tyres and tubes. However, I do not propose any
increase of duty on tractor, trailer and two wheeler tyres and tubes. This, along with
certain other rationalisation measures, is likely to yield a revenue gain of about Rs.40
crores.
 150. I propose to raise the specific rates of basic duties of excise on iron and
steel. The increase will generally be Rs.500 per tonne in the case of stainless steel
items and Rs.100 per tonne in the case of other items. In the case of downstream
dutiable products, MODVAT credit would continue to be available. The revenue gain
from this proposal is of the order of Rs.104 crores.
 151. Presently, the total rate of import duty on most of the stainless steel and
articles thereof is 345%. I propose to bring down the rate to the level of 200%. The
proposals in regard to customs duties on these and other steel items are expected to
result in the loss of revenue to the tune of Rs.10 crores.
 152. At present, the country has a surplus production of aluminium. In order to
discourage imports, I propose to increase the basic customs duty on aluminium ingots
by Rs.3500 per tonne.
 153. Major plastic raw materials attract excise duty ranging from 30% to 65%.
However, the rate of duty on polystyrene is only 20%. As a measure of rationalisation,
I propose to increase this rate to 30%. The proposal is expected to yield additional
revenue of Rs.5 crores.
 24

 154. I propose to increase the basic excise duty on paste grade PVC used in the
manufacture of leather cloth from Rs.15000 to Rs.20000 per tonne as an anti-evasion
measure. The excise duty rates on PVC coated textiles are also proposed to be revised
upwards. These measures are expected to yield Rs.17.5 crores.
 155. At present, various categories of paints and varnishes are liable to excise
duty at different rates ranging between 15% and 35%. I propose to rationalise the
rates by keeping only two levels of duty at 15% and 30% as against the present five
rates. The proposal involves prescribing a uniform excise duty of 15% on insulating
varnishes and water based paints and 30% on oil based and plastic based decorative
paints. The proposal would yield a revenue of Rs.9 crores.
 156. Currently special excise duty at the rate of 1/20th of the basic duty of
excise is being levied on indigenously produced goods. However, for the computation
of countervailing duty of customs on imported goods, special excise duty is not taken
into account. I do not think such a distinction is warranted. I propose to subject the
imported goods to countervailing duty on the basis of the excise duty inclusive of
special excise duty. This proposal is expected to yield customs revenue of Rs.60
crores.
 157. The Baggage Rules relating to free allowance admissible to passengers
arriving from foreign countries are being modified. The general free allowance is
being increased from the existing level of Rs.1250 to Rs.2000 per passenger. There
will be a uniform duty rate of 250% for baggage in excess of this limit as against the
existing 175% and 245%. 1 also propose to prescribe a uniform duty rate of 25% on
specified articles brought by passengers coming from abroad after a period of stay of
more than one year, subject to certain conditions. The revised measures will take
effect from the 1st April, 1990.
 158. Provision is being made for continuance of auxiliary duty of customs and
special excise duty at the existing rates.
 159. As the Honourable Members are aware, Inland Air Travel Tax was
introduced in the Budget of last year. The tax is leviable at 10% of one component of
the total air fare, namely, basic fare. I propose to levy the tax at the existing rate on the
full air fare. The estimated revenue gain from the proposal will be Rs.15 crores.
 160. As I mentioned in the earlier part of my speech, in recent years our
consumption of petroleum products has risen sharply. Honourable Members are also
aware that petroleum prices abroad have been hardening. The greater dependence on
import has led to a large outflow of foreign exchange and higher overall foreign
borrowing. It has now become necessary to review the domestic prices of petroleum
products. Keeping in view the interests of the common man, there will be no increase,
I repeat, no increase in prices of kerosene and LPG cylinders. There will also be no
increase in prices of naphtha for fertilizers and other uses. natural gas, furnace oil for
 25

industry, bitumen for roads and low speed diesel oil for farmers. Among the selected
items whose prices are being revised with effect from this midnight are motor spirit,
high speed diesel oil and aviation turbine fuel for domestic users. While the price of
motor spirit is being raised by Rs.1.25 per litre ex-storage, the price of high speed
diesel oil will go up by 54 paise per litre. The price of aviation turbine fuel will
increase by Rs.1320.45 per kilolitre. The increase in retail prices will vary from State
to State depending on transportation charges and the incidence of local taxes and
levies. I propose to mop up a part of the gain accruing to the oil companies as a result
of price revision. The import duty on crude oil is being increased from Rs.1060 to
Rs.1500 per tonne. This will yield a revenue of Rs.836 crores.
 161. The government is compelled to perform this painful duty of increasing
the prices of some petroleum products. But these are the hard options forced on us by
the grave fiscal situation, rising external debts, and the difficult balance of payments
position. We could have postponed these options only at the peril of our economic
independence and self-reliance.
 162. I have also proposed certain amendments in the Finance Bill seeking to
effect changes in the excise and customs tariffs. These amendments are generally
enabling provisions and have no revenue significance. Besides, there are proposals for
amendment of some of the existing notifications. In order to save the time of the
House, I do not propose to recount them.
 163. The proposals in regard to changes in die excise duties outlined above are
likely to yield additional revenue of Rs.778.63.crores. The concessions and reliefs
announced aggregate to Rs.388.44 crores. Out of the net additional shareable revenue
from excise duties of Rs.390.19 crores, the centre’s share would be Rs.217.12 crores
and the States share is Rs.173.07 crores.
 164. My tax effort in respect of customs duties will bring in Rs.979.79 crores.
Net of reliefs amounting to Rs.144.76 crores, the additional revenue from customs
duties accruing to the Centre will be Rs.835.03 crores. Besides, the changes in the
Inland Air Travel Tax would yield Rs.15 crores.
 165. Copies of notifications giving effect to the changes in customs and excise
duties effective from the 20th March, 1990 will be laid on the Table of the House in
due course.
 166. I now have something to say on behalf of my Honourable colleague, the
Minister of Communications. Postal Service is highly employment intensive and salary
and allowances constitute a major part of the operating expenses of the Postal
Department. The grant of additional instalments of Dearness Allowance and increases
in other operational expenses add significantly to these costs. The postal rates do not
meet even the direct cost of most of the services. A revision of tariff for some postal
services has, therefore, become unavoidable. However, in the interest of the common
 26

man and cheap and wider dissemination of information, there will be no change in the
tariff for ordinary postcards and registered newspapers. The rate of printed postcard,
which is used mainly for business purposes, is being raised from 40 paise to 60 paise,
of inland letter card from 50 paise, inclusive of the stationery charge, to a consolidated
amount of 75 paise, and of envelopes to a uniform rate of Re. one for every 20 grains
without any stationery charge. There are also certain other changes which are explained
in the memorandum circulated alongwith the Budget documents. The changes would
take effect from a date to be notified after the Finance Bill is passed. The revisions
proposed are estimated to yield an additional revenue of about Rs.207 crores in a full
year and about Rs.172 crores in 1990-91.
 167. Honourable Members will recall that the 46th Constitution Amendment
Act, 1982 gave enabling powers to the Parliament to levy a tax on consignment of
goods where such consignment takes place in the course of inter-state trade or
commerce. However, there have been differences of opinion on the modalities of
implementation of this law and the matter has been discussed in various meetings of
the Chief Ministers. The broad parameters have now been settled and a Committee of
Chief Ministers was appointed to work out the guidelines for granting exemptions
from this tax, both by the Centre and the States. I propose to consult the Chief Ministers
shortly to take a final view in the matter.
 168. I had earlier mentioned that the budget deficit at the existing rates of
taxes would be Rs.9165 crows. Taking into account the net additional yield from the
modifications proposed in direct and indirect taxes and the revised postal tariff, the
deficit for the next year is estimated at Rs.7206 crores. Honourable Members will
note that this deficit is substantially lower than the deficit of Rs.11750 crores in the
revised estimates of 1989-90. In order to give the right signal and contain inflationary
pressure, I have also tried to keep next year’s deficit even lower than the budget
estimate of Rs.7337 crores for the current year.
 169. It is my firm determination that the deficit provided for in the budget
should not be exceeded. A half-yearly review of the actual developments in the
budgetary situation will be made, and the people and the Parliament kept informed
about the performance in relation to the deficit.
 170. We need to make our fiscal and tax system more stable and predictable.
The system of making a large number of changes in the tax rates and tax laws every
year, apart from introducing uncertainty, casts a severe burden on the administrative
system. It also affects compliance and increases litigation. While some changes in tax
rates and laws are inevitable, it is desirable to keep the basic structure stable at least
for some time. With this end in view, the Government will present a document on the
Long Term Fiscal Policy to Parliament.
 171. With this, I have come to the end of my labours. We faced a fiscal situation
which constituted a threat to the economic strength and stability of our country. The
 27

choice before us was to let things drift, borrow more and consume more or to take the
corrective action now, however difficult. We have made our choice. We have taken
some resources from the rich and used them to give some relief to the poor and the
common man.. We have begun a process to restrain the budgetary deficit and contain
the inflationary pressure. We have tilted the balance of planning and investment towards
the rural areas and in favour of employment.
 172. As a man of science, wedded to non-doctrinaire socialism, I consider
experimentation and its results the touchstone on which can be tested the relevance of
all social and economic perceptions and policies.
 173. This is the essence of pragmatism and the quintessence of the unending
quest of socio-economic experimenters like Gandhiji, Jaya Prakash and Acharya
Narendra Dev.
 174. Mr. Speaker, with my irrevocable commitment to such a pragmatic
approach, I present this Budget to this august House as a short term device to move
steadily, and yet resolutely, towards the long term objective of ensuring growth with
equity and self-reliance. In this endeavour, I seek the wholehearted support of the
people through their chosen democratic instrument - this honourable Parliament.
 175. Sir, I commend the Budget to the House.
 [19th March, 1990]




 28

