 PART B
 89. I shall now turn to my revenue proposals. Every Budget has to raise some
resources for financing expenditure, and I shall not be failing in my duty to do so.
However, I do believe that it is equally, if not more, important to use fiscal policy for
achieving our wider economic and social goals while, at the same time, providing
relief where it is due. I am sure, the Hon’ble Members will find a strong link between
the proposals that I am about to make, and some of the people-oriented initiatives that
I have referred to in Part A of my speech.
 90. This House is aware of the fact that in view of the exigencies of the
situation, in order to meet the formidable after-effects of the drought of 1987-88,
Government took a decision to levy a surcharge of 5% on income-tax for persons
with taxable income above Rs.50,000, a surcharge of 10% on wealth tax for the
assessment year 1988-89 and a 5% surcharge by way of auxiliary duty of customs on
imported goods excluding essential commodities like fertilizers, power equipment,
life-saving drugs and medical equipment, etc. This timely action helped the country
and the Central and State Governments to meet the requirements of a very difficult
situation created by the drought. This surcharge did not touch essential commodities.
 91. In view of the continuing pernicious effects of the drought and the natural
calamities, I propose to continue with these surcharges for one more year. In addition,
it is now proposed to levy a surcharge by way of Special Excise Duty at the rate of
1/20th of the Basic Duty of Excise. The incidence of this surcharge will generally be
small; for example, it will be only one quarter of one percent i.e. 0.25%, where the
basic duty is 5% ad valorem and one percentage point where the basic duty is 20%.
 92. Essential commodities and other priority items which are presently exempt
from excise duty will continue to remain exempt. I am also exempting from this
 18

surcharge, certain other essential goods of common consumption, namely, sugar,
matches, cotton fabrics, vanaspati, refined vegetable oil, tea, coffee and kerosene.
Direct Taxes
 93. Hon’ble Members will recall that, in August, 1986, a Discussion Paper on
Direct Tax Laws was presented in Parliament. After further discussions and
consultations among experts and the public, the Government had introduced the Direct
Tax Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1987, which was passed during the last Session. Since
then, many representations have been received from experts, concerned Associations,
Chambers of Commerce and other tax-payers regarding some provisions in the Act.
The following, inter alia, are the main points made in these representations:-
 (1) The proposed system of assessment of partnership firms is too harsh
 particularly on partnership firms with small income, as such firms, subject
 to certain deductions, will henceforth be taxed at the maximum marginal
 rate. Certain other clarifications have also been sought in regard to some
 other provisions relating to taxation of firms.
 (2) The levy of additional tax at a flat rate of 30 per cent would be very unfair
 in cases of genuine doubt regarding taxability of certain receipts and that
 the levy of additional tax should itself be appealable.
 (3) The provisions relating to charitable trusts, voluntary agencies and
 institutions carrying on scientific research, etc. may result in unintended
 hardship, particularly as regards the treatment of contributions to the corpus
 of such institutions.
 (4) The new Act provides for unfettered discretion regarding re-opening of
 assessments merely on a change of opinion.
 94. There are many positive features in the Act, which will help the tax-
payers by simplifying the law, but there is also scope for reconsideration keeping in
view the representations against some of its provisions. In a democracy, Government
should always keep itself abreast of public opinion and be flexible enough to respond
to reasonable suggestions. Government will bring a further amendment bill in the
Budget Session which will take care of genuine grievances. After the Bill is introduced,
Government will be happy to consider any further suggestions that the Hon’ble
Members may have to offer.
 95. A reasonable degree of stability in the Direct Tax regime is desirable for
inspiring confidence and encouraging savings and investment. I do not, therefore,
propose any change in the rate structure for personal and corporate taxes.
 96. There is, however, a case for reducing, to some extent, the brunt of the
burden borne by the fixed income groups. I, therefore, propose to raise the rate of
standard deduction from 30 per cent to 33-1/3rd per cent of salary income and the
 19

ceiling from Rs.10,000/- to Rs.12,000/-. This measure will benefit about a million
tax-payers.
 97. Hon’ble Members will recall that Estate Duty was abolished from March,
1985. This was done mainly because the Estate Duty law was complicated and led to
procedural harassment to large numbers of tax-payers at a time of great distress, with
negligible gain in terms of revenue. However, there is a strong case on grounds of
social justice for taxing the transfer of wealth through inheritance especially where
the volume of wealth involved is large. This matter has been under consideration of
Government for some time. Government have decided to levy a tax on the transfer of
wealth which will be applicable to all wealth-tax assessees. The tax will be levied in
respect of assets subject to wealth tax. The method for valuation of assets would be
the same as for the wealth tax. It will also be administered by the wealth tax officer.
The rate of the wealth transfer tax would be 5 times the applicable wealth tax rates.
This new tax will avoid the rigidities and procedural delays which characterised the
operation of the old Estate Duty Act. As I have mentioned, it will be applicable only
to wealth tax assessees and will not affect ordinary tax-payers. Separate legislation
in this regard will be introduced in this Session.
 98. The thrust of my other proposals in regard to Direct Taxes is to strengthen
incentives for export promotion and foreign exchange earnings, to encourage savings
and to stimulate the capital market.
 99. To encourage exports, I propose to enhance the existing tax concession
under Section 80 HHC for export profits so as to exempt 100 per cent of export profits
from income-tax. It is also proposed to extend the benefit to supporting manufacturers
exporting through Trading or Export Houses. A five-year tax holiday presently available
for units in Free Trade Zones is also being extended to 100 per cent Export Oriented
Units. Replantation and rejuvenation subsidies for rubber, coffee and cardamom
plantations are also proposed to be exempted from income-tax.
 100. To promote long-term financing available for construction and purchase
of houses, I propose to enhance the existing concession available under Section 80L
in respect of interest and dividend income received from companies providing such
finance. At present, such income is included under the general exemption limit of
Rs.7,000. It is proposed to make such income also eligible under the separate limit of
Rs.3,000 for UTI under Section 80L.
 101. As an anti-evasion measure, I propose to provide for assessment of income
of persons engaged in certain trades, like liquor and forest contracts, at a reasonably
fixed percentage of the amount payable by them while purchasing the goods. The tax
will be collected at source.
 102. I also propose to tax under the head “capital gains”, income from transfer
of a capital asset by a holding company to its wholly-owned subsidiary company or
 20

vice versa, in every case where the capital asset is taken over as stock-in-trade at the
time of transfer.
 103. Hon’ble Members will recall that in Part A of my speech, I have already
referred to certain changes being made in the income-tax payable by LIC as well as
certain fiscal measures to promote the equity market. There are certain other minor
proposals regarding Direct Taxes in the Finance Bill.
 104. The total effect of these proposals will be a revenue loss of Rs.201 crores,
which will be off-set by my proposal to continue with the levy of surcharge on income-
tax and wealth-tax which will mean a gain of Rs.270 crores. Thus, the net increase in
revenue will be Rs.69 crores.
Indirect Taxes
 105. Sir, I will now move on to the proposals relating to indirect taxes. It has
been my endeavour to see that the basic thrust provided in the field of indirect taxes
in the Budget last year is carried forward. I have proposals for providing stimuli to
cover agriculture and farming sectors, rural employment, exports, health and medical
care, housing and construction activities, technology upgradation and selected industries
such as cement, textiles, electronics, paper and plastics. There are also some important
reliefs for the common man .
Agricultural and other allied sectors
 106. In Part A of my speech, I have announced several measures for the benefit
of the farmers, including reduction in interest rates and reduction in cost of inputs,
such as fertilizers. I now propose a number of fiscal reliefs for promotion of agriculture
and agro-based activities.
 107. Monobloc pumpsets and submersible pumpsets are important for irrigation.
I am exempting electric motors used in these pumpsets from excise duty.
 108. To bring down the cost for farmers, I propose to fully exempt from excise
duty a large number of pesticide intermediates. I am also proposing to reduce customs
duty in respect of a number of pesticides and pesticide intermediates from the existing
levels of 105 per cent and 147 per cent to 70 per cent and 60 per cent ad valorem.
These measures will reduce the cost of indigenous production and the end-prices.
 109. With a view to promoting modernisation in the agricultural, horticultural,
poultry and bee-keeping sectors, I am providing for full exemption from excise duty
in respect of machinery for these sectors such as sprinkler systems, fodder mixers,
germination appliances, egg candlers, etc.
 110. Cold storages are of great importance for the marketing of agricultural
produce. I propose to reduce the excise duty on parts and accessories going into the
installation of cold storage plants from 40 per cent to 15 per cent ad valorem.
 21

 111. As the House is aware, the Government has taken up an ambitious
programme of increasing milk production through genetic improvement of cattle and
buffaloes. Certain critical equipments, hormones and drugs required for this programme
are accordingly being exempted from customs duty in excess of 25 per cent ad valorem.
Food Processing and Packaging
 112. Growth of food processing and packaging industry can be of immense
help in increasing the value-added of agricultural produce and raising incomes of
farmers. In continuation of certain measures for growth of this industry, announced
by the Prime Minister last year, it is proposed to further reduce the customs duty in
respect of 34 specified items of food processing and packaging machinery from 55 per
cent to 35 per cent ad valorem. I also propose to reduce the excise duty on preparations
from vegetables, fruits, nuts or other parts of plants like jams, fruit juices, etc. from 10
per cent to 5 per cent ad valorem. Such preparations from vegetables and fruits like
jams, jellies, fruit juices, sauces, ketchups and pickles, if manufactured in rural areas
by registered cooperative societies, Khadi & Village Industries Commission and State
Khadi & Village Industries Boards are proposed to be exempted from excise duty
altogether.
 113. I also propose to reduce the excise duty on aluminium foil from 25 per
cent to 15 per cent ad valorem. This will help in hygienic and scientific packaging of
processed food, drugs, condiments, etc.
Rural Employment
 114. Off-farm self-employment provides a major route for enhancing income
and earnings in the rural areas. Individually, a micro-entrepreneur with low staying
power is vulnerable to adverse market forces. His success lies in cooperative ventures.
Hence, I am providing for a special scheme for generation of self- employment in the
rural areas. Under the proposed scheme, specified products, namely, radios, cassette
players and recorders in combination with radios, tape recorders, voltage stabilizers,
footwear of a value not exceeding Rs.75 per pair and a few other items will be fully
exempt from excise duty, if they are manufactured in rural areas by registered
cooperative societies, including self-employed women’s cooperatives or cooperative
societies under the Scheme of Development of Women and Children in Rural Areas or
the Khadi and Village Industries Commission or the State Khadi and Village Industries
Boards.
 115. As Hon’ble Members are aware, there are a large number of self-employed
persons working as carpenters, fitters, electricians, plumbers, etc. To lend further
strength to their toiling hands and with the twin objectives of increasing their
productivity and earnings, I propose to reduce the excise duty in respect of some hand
tools like files, screwdrivers, pliers, etc. from 20% to 10% ad valorem.
 116. To promote better accounting and to relieve the traders, city-based shop
keepers, small businessmen, wholesalers and small factory owners from the drudgery
 22

of book-keeping at the end of the day, I propose to reduce excise duty from 20% to
10% on small electronic cash registers of assessable value of Rs.10,000 or below.
Consumer Articles
 117. I am conscious of the fact that common consumers have been affected by
some price increase. I am anxious to give them some relief within the constraints in
which I am operating.
 118. I propose to increase the upper value limit from Rs.25,000/- to Rs.30,000/-
for the purpose of extending the concessional rate of excise duty of 15 per cent ad
valorem in respect of a wide variety of commonly used toilet soaps. I am also proposing
to fully exempt from excise duty laundry and carbolic soaps manufactured in rural
areas by cooperatives and khadi and village industries sector.
 119. So far, electric bulbs upto 60 watts have been exempted from excise duty.
With a view to facilitating a brighter luminance in houses, streets, work places, etc.,
I propose to reduce the excise duty in respect of electric bulbs exceeding 60 watts
from Rs. 1.50 per bulb to Re.1.00 per bulb.
 120. As a measure of providing a little more happiness and education among
children, I propose to completely exempt from excise duty toys, like toy scooters, toy
pedal cars, dolls, toy musical instruments, scale models, recreational models, etc. and
inexpensive pencil sharpeners.
 121. With a view to reducing domestic drudgery, I propose to fully exempt
from excise duty certain domestic electrical appliances from frying pans to saucepans.
I am also similarly exempting electric kettles, water-boilers, toasters and automatic
irons. I am also totally exempting stainless steel utensils from excise duty.
 122. As a further component of anti-smuggling measures and to cultivate a
greater sense of time-consciousness and to instil a spirit of greater punctuality among
the school-going children, college students, office-goers, the public generally and, if I
may venture to say so, politicians like us also, I propose to reduce the excise duty on
wall clocks and quartz clocks and parts thereof from 15 per cent to 5 per cent ad
valorem. I shall be announcing some relief for indigenous watch industry later in my
speech.
 123. In respect of glassware, I propose to reduce the excise duty in respect of
a number of items of tableware of common use like jugs, cups, plates, bowls, etc.
manufactured by automatic process from 40 per cent to 25 per cent ad valorem and
those manufactured by the semi-automatic or mouth-blown processes, to 20 per cent
ad valorem.
 124. I also propose to exempt from excise duty all children’s films and all
films selected for the Indian panorama section for International Film Festivals.
 23

 125. There can be no better auspicious occasion than the Government’s Annual
Budget to exempt sindoor, kajal, alta and mahavar -- the age-old symbols of glorious
and devout womanhood -- from taxation and, accordingly, I hereby do so by proposing
to fully exempt these from excise duty.
Health and Medicare
 126. Our goal is to provide cheap and efficient medicare to all our people.
Towards achieving this objective, availability of essential drugs at lower prices has to
be ensured. I, therefore, intend to align the excise tariff, as far as possible, with the
new Drug (Prices Control) Order, 1987. I propose to provide total exemption from
excise duties in respect of formulations and bulk drugs which are specified in Category
I of the Drug (Prices Control) Order. Intermediates for these drugs will also be fully
exempt from excise duty. The House would recall that the drugs specified in Category
I are required for the National Health Programmes like T.B., Leprosy, Malaria, Filaria
Eradication programmes and programmes for the control of blindness and trachoma
and prevention of dehydration.
 127. A concessional excise duty of 10% ad valorem is being prescribed for
single ingredient formulations based on drugs specified in Category II of the Drug
(Prices Control) Order. I also propose to continue the existing excise duty exemptions
in respect of specified cardiac drugs and anti-TB, anti-malaria, anti-leprosy and anti-
diabetic drugs. Two anti-cancer drugs and an important life-saving drug, are proposed
to be added to the list of exempted drugs. However, I propose to withdraw the existing
exemption from customs duty in respect of specified formulations for which adequate
indigenous capacity has been built up. It is hoped that these fiscal reliefs will encourage
domestic production and help better availability of these vital drugs.
 128. I propose to prescribe a nominal excise levy of 5% on bulk drugs except
those covered by Category I of Drugs (Prices Control) Order . This will enable the
manufacturers to avail of MODVAT credit in respect of all dutiable inputs including
drug intermediates. I also propose to reduce the import duty on 235 specified drug
intermediates from 115% to 90% ad valorem.
 129. In the related field of medical equipment, the procedure for customs duty-
free import of hospital equipments, apparatus, appliances including spare parts and
accessories by Government and Government-controlled hospitals is being simplified.
Similarly, the procedure for import of specified sophisticated medical equipment at a
concessional duty of 40% ad valorem is also being streamlined. In respect of such
imports by Non- Resident Indians, financed out of their own foreign exchange
resources, the duty will be even lower at 20%. Import of such equipment when
financed by Government to Government assistance will be exempt from customs duty.
 130. I propose to extend the concessional duty to spare parts of such specified
equipments also at 40% ad valorem. The list of medical equipments attracting
concessional customs duty at 40% ad valorem is being enlarged by addition of 83
 24

dental, ophthalmological, cardiological, gynaecological, general surgical and other
medical equipments. Components of these equipments will also be charged duty at
40% as against the existing levels ranging from 80% to 130% ad valorem in order to
encourage domestic manufacture of these equipments.
 131. I also propose to reduce the excise duty on these indigenously manufactured
equipments from 15% to 5% ad valorem. The excise duty on X-ray films is also
proposed to be reduced from 15% to 5% ad valorem. Excise duty on aluminium
extrusions and square and round tubes used in the manufacture of artificial limbs is
being exempted altogether.
 132. I hope that our dedicated doctors throughout the country will now be able
to modernise their hospitals and clinics a little faster and patients will get better care
and treatment thereby.
Housing
 133. As I mentioned earlier, in order to encourage growth of housing it is
necessary to reduce the cost of house building material. Hence, I propose to provide
a general reduction in excise duty on cement from Rs. 225 to Rs. 205 per tonne. The
existing differential in excise duty rates for certain categories of cement units will
also continue. The levy ratios for certain categories of cement units are also being
reduced.
 134. In order to protect the environment and help divert demand from wood to
metals, excise duty on doors, windows and their frames and thresholds for doors,
made of aluminium is proposed to be reduced from 20% to 15% ad valorem. Similarly,
excise duty on corrugated sheets of aluminium is being reduced from 25% to 15% ad
valorem. I also propose to reduce the excise duty on steel doors, windows and their
frames and thresholds for doors from 15% to 5% ad valorem.
 135. It is time that we think innovatively and use unconventional materials for
housing which would be cheap and functional. The excise duty on blocks, slabs,
lintels, etc. constituting structural intermediates and components of pre-fabricated
buildings is being reduced from 12% to 5% ad valorem. Similarly, fly ash bricks will
pay a lower duty of 5% ad valorem, and lympo, a cement substitute, will bear a zero
rate of duty.
 136. To reduce fire hazards, we should promote the use of fire extinguishers.
With this end in view, I propose to exempt fire-extinguishers from excise duty.
Exports
 137. To thrive in the highly competitive international market, our natural
advantages and production efforts have to be supplemented by adequate fiscal and
other measures. In this context, I propose to take some further measures to promote
exports.
 25

 138. Concessional rates of customs duty have been provided in the past in
respect of specified items of machinery for identified export thrust sectors. Eight
more machines for the garments and hosiery sector, twenty-three machines for the
leather industry, four more machines for the gem and jewellery industry and three
more items of textile machinery will now attract a concessional rate of 35% ad
valorem. Specified items of machinery for the tea, bicycle, silk and woollen industries
are being provided with a concessional customs duty of 35% ad valorem.
 139. Ivory and Ivory powder are being totally exempted from customs duty.
This will help reduce poaching in our jungles as well as provide adequate raw
material for ivory handicraft industry, which is export-oriented.
 140. The value-limit of duty-free import of commercial samples is being
enhanced from Rs.1000 to Rs.5000 in a year; and for duty-free import of prototypes
of engineering goods, from Rs.1000 to Rs.10,000.
 141. Full rebate of excise duty will now be available for tea exported directly
from factories. The procedure for claiming rebate of excise duty on export of unblended
tea by merchant-exporters is being simplified. Green tea is being exempted from
excise duty altogether.
Capital Goods
 142. In the modern industrial world, obsolescence takes place at a fast rate.
Unless one upgrades the technology continuously, one is apt to be left out in the race.
Following Prime Minister’s guideline given in last year’s Budget speech, I had
announced in August 1987, a technology upgradation scheme, under which fiscal
relief was provided in respect of import of specified items of capital equipments
required for manufacture of machinery covered by the scheme at 35% ad valorem. To
promote domestic production of such machinery, the customs duty on selected raw
materials needed for their production is being reduced to 55% from the existing level
ranging from around 100% to 180%. These include specified insulation materials,
copper conductors and special electrical steel sheets for power generation and electrical
equipment and clad steel plates for manufacture of selected industrial machinery
specified in the technology upgradation scheme. The customs duty on boiler and
presssure vessel quality steel plates, turbine blade flats and stainless steel plates
required for manufacture of machinery is also being reduced from 90% to 55%.
Scientific equipment and spares
 143. There have been persistent demands from the scientific community for
further fiscal concessions in regard to consumables required for research and spares
of imported equipment. Keeping in view the importance of scientific research, the
existing duty concession schemes are being liberalised. The certification procedures,
which have been acting as hurdles in the clearance of these goods, are being simplified.
 144. Some specified scientific instruments and apparatus would bear excise
duty of 5% ad valorem instead of the current rate of 15%.
 26

Textiles
 145. The textile industry has a unique place in the industrial map of India. It
provides jobs to millions of our people. It is a major export earner, and is directly
linked to agriculture. Of late, the industry has suffered from widespread sickness and
haphazard growth. Availability and prices of raw cotton and cotton yarn have been
subject to considerable instability. Handloom weavers are suffering because of yarn
prices. Powerlooms have their problems too. While production of synthetic yarn,
which is used for blended fabrics preferred for their durability by the common man,
has expanded, prices of such yarn have been very high. Smuggling has been another
problem which, despite Government’s strong action, has had some adverse effects on
the economy.
 146. In order to overcome these problems, in 1985, Government had announced
a new Textile Policy. Its primary objective was to increase production of cloth of
acceptable quality at reasonable prices. In line with this policy, a number of measures
have already been taken by the Government. These have yielded results as reflected
in the increase in production and availability of cloth. I now propose to provide some
fiscal support to the endeavours of the Ministry of Textiles in reviving this industry
so that, once again, it can regain its rightful place in our economy. My proposals,
which follow are based on a comprehensive review of the duty structure relating to
the various segments of the industry with a view to lowering prices, increasing the
demand for fabrics and increasing the base of production.
 147. In 1985, a scheme was evolved for making available duty-free polyester
staple fibre to the handloom sector for manufacture of designated fabrics under a
scheme approved by the Government. I now propose to reduce the excise duty on
polyester filament yarn for manufacturing handloom fabrics under a scheme for supply
management and distribution of fabrics, to be announced by the Ministry of Textiles.
Similarly, viscose filament yarn will bear a concessional rate of 50 per cent of the
existing duty, when the yarn is supplied to registered handloom cooperative societies
or any approved organisation for the development of handlooms.
 148. I also propose to exempt handloom woollen fabrics processed by approved
independent processors from excise duty. Raw wool imported by certain specified
handloom agencies is being exempted from customs duty. The import duty on acetate
filament yarn is being reduced from 60 per cent to 45 per cent.
 149. In order to reduce prices of cotton yarn, it is proposed to reduce the excise
duty on cotton yarn of counts not exceeding 35 by 10 per cent of the existing rates.
The excise duty on cotton yarn above 35 counts is being reduced by 3 paise per count.
This will mean a reduction of upto a maximum of 28.5 per cent, depending on the
count of yarn.
 150. Considering the fact that viscose staple fibre would help substituting for
cotton, I propose to reduce the excise duty on viscose staple fibre cleared for blending
 27

with cotton from the existing level of Rs. 7 per kg. to Rs. 5 per kg. Simultaneously,
I propose to increase the duty on viscose staple fibre used for other purposes to Rs. 8
per kg. to divert more VSF for cotton blending.
 151. The National Textile Corporation is already manufacturing cheap fabrics
under a special scheme, for which polyester staple fibre is being supplied free of
excise duty. I propose to provide that polyester filament yarn will be available at a
concessional duty rate of Rs.10 per kg. to the National Textile Corporation for
manufacturing fabrics under a duty credit scheme. The details will be announced
separately.
 152. In line with the Textile Policy, in order to facilitate absorption of increased
domestic production, I propose to reduce fiscal levies on man-made fibres and yarn.
This would also help revitalise the powerloom sector which is facing problems of
under-utilisation of capacity and consequent problems of unemployment. The duty on
polyester staple fibre is being reduced from Rs.25 to Rs.15 per kg., and on polyester
filament yarn from Rs.83.75 to Rs.53.75 per kg. At the same time, in order to ensure
greater availability and to put pressure on the domestic producers to pass on the
reduction in excise duties fully to the consumers, import duties on these items are also
being reduced by about 25 percentage points.
 153. The excise duty on nylon filament yarn is being reduced from Rs.70 to
Rs.40 per kg. and that on acrylic fibre from Rs.10 to Rs. 8 per kg. Customs duty on
these items is also being suitably reduced.
 154. It is also proposed to reduce the excise duty on nylon filament yarn for
industrial purposes such as for manufacture of tyres for cycles and industrial filter
fabrics, from Rs. 70 to Rs.8.13 per kg. Nylon filament yarn of specified deniers used
for fishing nets will pay an even lower concessional duty of Rs.4.55 per kg.
 155. I also propose to reduce the excise duty on certain specified textile
machinery required for modernisation of the mills from 15 per cent to 5 per cent ad
valorem. The customs duty on certain specified machinery for the garment, hosiery
and woollen industries is being reduced to 35 per cent, as indicated earlier.
 156. Hon’ble Members will agree that these comprehensive fiscal measures,
supported by other measures taken by the Ministry of Textiles, should give a boost to
the textile industry and help protect jobs of lakhs of workers. These should also
improve the working of the mills of the National Textile Corporation. I fully expect
and shall insist upon the entire relief being passed on in the form of lower prices.
 157. At this point, I would also like to ask manufacturers in all industries,
where I have granted excise concessions, to pass on the excise relief to consumers in
the form of lower prices. Administrative Ministries concerned are being requested to
keep a close watch on the price behaviour of these commodities. I shall not hesitate
 28

to withdraw the concessions, wherever there is evidence of manufacturers taking undue
advantage of these concessions.
Electronics
 158. We have been using the fiscal mechanism for some time to give a boost to
the entire electronics sector. As a result of Government policy, substantial growth has
taken place in this sector, giving employment to lakhs of young men and women. At
present, concessional rates of customs duty of 60% or 70% ad valorem are available
in respect of specified items of machinery for the electronics industry. These
concessions have been reviewed. With a view to providing a stimulus and keeping in
view the latest advances in technology, I propose to extend a uniform concessional
duty of 60% ad valorem in respect of 280 items of machinery for the electronics
sector.
 159. Customs duty on moulds, tools and dies required by the electronics industry
is being reduced further from 60% to 30% ad valorem. The coverage of the graded
structure of duties for raw materials, piece parts and components for the industry is
being enlarged. Polycrystalline silicon will now bear a lower duty of 35% instead of
the existing 80%.
 160. Machinery and instruments required for the manufacture of Rural
Automatic Exchanges based on indigenous technology will attract a lower rate of duty
of 30%. A uniform rate of 100% is being provided in respect of a large number of
equipments for telecommunication transmission, satellite communication, switching,
data communication terminals, television transmission, studio and sound broadcasting.
Non-electronic components of these equipments will bear a lower duty of 80%. With
a view to encouraging production of high-tech items like Large-Scale Integrated circuits,
micro-processors and other micro-electronics items, import of 22 items of machinery
will be allowed at 15% ad valorem.
 161. At present, computers, computer systems and peripherals attract varying
rates of duty ranging from zero to 147.5%. As a rationalisation measure, a uniform
rate of duty of 80% ad valorem plus countervailing duty is being provided in respect
of all computers, computer systems, computer peripherals and spare parts thereof.
Software will continue to attract the existing rates of customs duty at 60% ad valorem.
As an export incentive, accompanying computer software and start-up spares imported
under the policy on computer software export, software development and training will
be allowed at the rate applicable to the hardware. Computerized Numerically Controlled
systems and their parts at present attract a customs duty of 80%. This is being lowered
to 55% ad valorem. Excise duty on Computerised Numerically Controlled systems is
being reduced to 5% ad valorem.
 162. Colour TV sets of screen size exceeding 36 cms and of assessable value
exceeding Rs. 5,000 per set will now attract an excise duty of Rs.2,000 instead of
Rs.1,750. However, such sets of value not exceeding Rs.5000 will continue to attract
 29

a duty of Rs.1500 per set as at present. Excise duty on audio magnetic tapes is being
enhanced to Rs. 4 per square metre. Blank audio cassettes are being exempted from
duty. Excise duty on computer software is being reduced from 25% to 10% ad valorem.
 163. Certain other industries also require a boost for their further development.
My proposals now cover a number of such industries.
Plastics
 164. The House would recall that the customs duties on various plastic materials,
such as LDPE, HDPE, PVC and polypropylene were lowered in September, 1987,
in the wake of the steep hike in the international prices of these materials. International
prices have since gone up even higher and there is need for further reduction in
customs duties. I, therefore, propose to reduce the basic customs duty on LDPE from
Rs.3,000 to Rs.2,000 per tonne and on HDPE from 30 per cent to 20 per cent ad
valorem.
 165. The auxiliary duty of customs on PVC is proposed to be converted from
ad valorem to specific, and in the case of suspension grade PVC is being reduced to
Rs.2000 per tonne and in the case of paste grade to Rs.4000 per tonne. In the case
of polypropylene, auxiliary duty is being reduced from 45 per cent to 30 per cent ad
valorem.
Automotive Sector
 166. In the automotive sector, I propose to extend the concessional rate of 55
per cent customs duty in respect of parts for certain additional components to be
manufactured by auto ancillaries for supply to fuel-efficient motor vehicles. Parts of
specified as well as additional components of fuel-efficient two-wheelers and light
commercial vehicles will now attract a lower rate of customs duty of 40 per cent ad
valorem as against the current rate of 55 per cent ad valorem. Concessional rate of
customs duty of 55 per cent ad valorem in respect of components required for the
manufacture of fuel-efficient cars upto 1000 cc under phased manufacturing programme
is proposed to be made available for a further period from 1.3.1988 to 31.3.1990.
Fuel-efficient motor cars of engine capacity exceeding 1000 cc manufactured under
approved phased manufacturing programme will, however, now attract excise duty at
the rate of 30 per cent ad valorem instead of the existing 25 per cent.
 167. I propose to reduce the excise duty from Rs. 1000 to Rs.500 per body in
respect of bodies of such three-wheeler auto-rickshaws, which are used by the general
public in major cities.
Vegetable oils
 168. In order to cut down on imports of vegetable oils, the Government had
taken fiscal measures in the previous years so as to encourage domestic production of
edible oils. These measures have had encouraging results. As a follow-up of the
measures taken in the last two years, I propose to provide total exemption from excise
 30

duty in respect of refined safflower oil. Rebate for the use of solvent-extracted cotton
seed oil in the manufacture of vanaspati is being increased from Rs.3250 to Rs.4000
per tonne. Rebate for the use of indigenous palm oil in the manufacture of vanaspati
is also being made available at the rate of Rs.3250 per tonne. Solvent-extracted
sunflower and safflower oils will, henceforth, qualify for rebate at the rate of Rs.3250
per tonne, if used in the manufacture of vanaspati. I am also proposing an increase in
the rate of rebate from Rs.320 to Rs.640 per tonne for the use of rice bran oil in the
manufacture of soaps.
Paper and Paper Board
 169. I propose to reduce the excise duty on paper and paper board manufactured
by small paper mills by Rs.100 per tonne in each of the existing slabs. Paper and
paper board manufactured by mills using agricultural residues such as cereal straw,
bagasse, grasses and jute waste, etc. already attract a lower rate of excise duty of 10
per cent ad valorem plus Rs.800 per tonne. I propose to reduce this duty further by
Rs.300 per tonne. Concession of 50 per cent of the excise duty available to certain
new paper mills upto 31.3.1988 is being continued till 31.3.1990.
 170. Specified items of machinery for manufacture of newsprint are being
provided with a concessional rate of customs duty of 25 per cent ad valorem.
 171. I also propose to provide for import of machinery for binding and multi-
colour sheet-fed off-set printing machine by registered newspaper establishments at
concessional rates of customs duty.
Rolling Bearing Industry
 172. In respect of 21 items of machinery for the rolling bearing industry, a
concessional duty of customs at 35 per cent ad valorem is being provided.
Watches
 173. With a view to giving a further boost to domestic watch industry, I intend
to reduce customs duty from 55 per cent to 35 per cent ad valorem in respect of
certain horological machinery and testing instruments. The list of horological raw
materials attracting concessional customs duty of 25 per cent ad valorem is being
enlarged. In addition, my detailed proposals provide for a sound package for certain
specified parts.
Glass and glassware
 174. I propose to restore the concessional rate of excise duty of 30 per cent ad
valorem in respect of glass and glassware manufactured by the semi-automatic sector.
Energy conservation
 175. In our industrial processes, many of us have remained rather unresponsive
to the need for energy conservation and energy recycling. The concept of energy
conservation is still in its infancy in the country and we have to provide some incentive
 31

in that direction. Accordingly, 15 specified energy-saving equipments are being
exempted from customs duty in excess of 40 per cent ad valorem.
Hotels
 176. To promote tourism in the country, certain additional equipments required
by hotels are being extended a concessional rate of customs duty of 90 per cent .
Rationalisation Measures
 177. My proposals on the indirect taxes include certain rationalisation measures.
 (a) Industry has found the MODVAT system beneficial. The procedural
 problems faced in the initial stages have, by and large, been sorted out. I
 propose to rationalize rates of excise duty in respect of a few commodities,
 including paints based on synthetic polymers, trailers, furniture, phthalic
 anhydride and coated textiles as a part of MODVAT corrections.
 (b) The scheme of excise duty concessions applicable to small scale industry
 relating to air-conditioning and refrigerating appliances and parts thereof
 is being slightly modified to enable full utilisation of the MODVAT credit.
 (c) I propose to align the excise tariff relating to ferrous and non-ferrous
 metals and articles thereof with the corresponding chapters of the
 Harmonised System which would help reduce classification disputes. Tariff
 rates of excise duty in respect of items relating to iron and steel and
 copper are being revised. The effective rates of excise duty would by and
 large be maintained. A uniform rate of excise duty of Rs.550 per tonne is
 being prescribed in respect of unmachined forgings and forged products
 of steel. The basic customs duty on ships, vessels and other floating
 structures imported for breaking up is being reduced from Rs.1035 to
 Rs.750 per Light Displacement Tonnage.
 (d) Certain proposals for rationalising and rounding off of rates of excise
 duty in respect of Petroleum products are being made. These proposals
 have no significant revenue implications.
 (e) The scheme of excise duty concession to manufacturers of tread rubber in
 the small scale sector is being revised as an anti-evasion measure.
 (f) As an anti-evasion measure, I am also proposing to enhance the basic
 customs duty in respect of certain compound alcoholic preparations of a
 kind used for the manufacture of beverages to Rs.80 per litre or 270%,
 whichever is higher.
 (g) There have been some reports regarding under-invoicing in respect of
 imports of galvanised steel sheets, tin plates and cold rolled steel sheets.
 In order to deal with this problem, the basic customs duty in respect of
 32

 these goods is being converted from ad valorem-cum-specific rates into
 specific rates.
 (h) Specific rates of excise duty in respect of air-conditioners upto 7.5 tonnes
 capacity are being revised. Specific rates are also being prescribed in
 respect of air-conditioners exceeding 7.5 tonnes but not exceeding 15
 tonnes.
 (i) As an anti-evasion measure, excise duty on paste grade PVC is proposed
 to be increased from 40% to 60% ad valorem. The duty paid on the resin
 would be available as MODVAT credit. Effective rates of duty on coated
 textiles are being suitably revised.
 (j) In order to provide protection to the indigenous industry, I am proposing
 to enhance the basic customs duty in respect of Sodium Formaldehyde
 Sulphoxylate from 70% to 110% and Sodium Ferrocyanide from 70% to
 100% and iron powder from 40% to 70%. The basic customs duty in
 respect of palm nuts and kernels is also proposed to be raised from 60%
 to 200% ad valorem.
 178. Legislative changes and other changes of minor significance: Apart
from the above proposals, certain amendments have also been proposed in the Finance
Bill effecting changes in the excise and customs tariffs. These amendments are basically
enabling provisions without any major revenue significance. Besides, there are a few
minor proposals for continuing, amending or rescinding existing notifications including
one for giving retrospective effect to an amending notification. To save the precious
time of the House, I do not wish to dwell on them. I am also providing for amendment
of some of the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, details of which are in the
Finance bill. A few amendments to the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, are also proposed,
so as to align the definitions of certain goods of special importance with reference to
the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985.
 179. Copies of notifications giving effect to the changes in the customs and
excise duties effective from 1st March, 1988 will be laid on the Table of the House in
due course.
 180. Anti-smuggling drive: Our anti-smuggling efforts yielded a seizure of
Rs.250 crores of contraband goods in 1987 which is the highest ever. I have instructed
the concerned authorities to relentlessly continue the drive against smuggling, tax
evasion and black money. I also seek the active cooperation of the State Governments,
as it is with their assistance that we can succeed in this task. I hope and trust that the
State Governments will also mount active steps against hoarding, black-marketing,
smuggling and sale of smuggled goods.
 181. Revenue effect: Details of all the pluses and minuses in respect of
individual items covered in my proposals are in the Explanatory Memorandum to the
 33

Finance Bill. In the aggregate, my proposals in respect of Customs and Central Excise
duties outlined above are likely to yield additional revenue of Rs.515.75 crores from
Customs duties and Rs.749.17 crores from Excise duties. The concessions and reliefs
aggregate to Rs.209.44 crores on the Customs side and Rs.509.79 crores on the Excise
side. The net additional revenue from Customs duties would, thus, be Rs.306.31 crores
and that from Excise duties Rs.239.38 crores. In Excise duties, the Centre’s share
would be Rs.117.23 crores and that of States, Rs.122.15 crores. Out of the total net
additional yield of Rs.545.69 crores, the Centre’s share would be Rs.423.54 crores
and that of the States, Rs.122.15 crores.
 182. Taking into account the additional yield from the modifications proposed
in direct and indirect taxes and the revision announced a few days ago in postal tariffs,
the year end deficit for the next year is estimated at Rs.7484 crores. Government
reiterates its determination to closely monitor expenditure, maximise collection of
revenues and contain the budgetary deficit.
 183. Mr. Speaker, Sir, in framing the Budget proposals, my guiding principle
has been the need to boost agriculture, help the poor and generate more employment,
investment and growth. India’s achievements since Independence are the result of the
untiring efforts of all our people. Every section of our people has contributed to build
the country’s economy. No single section or region or group can claim exclusive
credit for it. The nation’s Parliament as the supreme forum of our democracy has also
made an invaluable contribution. In all humility, may I take this opportunity to request
through you, Sir, all the Hon’ble Members of Parliament, to make this year’s debate
on the budget a participatory and constructive endeavour to evolve a nationally accepted
strategy to achieve our goals.
 184. Let us be proud of what all of us together have been able to do and if
there are inadequacies or deficiencies, let us overcome them collectively. Let us all
join in the exciting task of India’s economic development and do so by making it a
common fraternal partnership of the entire Indian people. As our Prime Minister Shri
Rajiv Gandhi said a couple of months ago:
 “Our socialism is our own. It is not a foreign transplant. It is not cast in
 someone else’s ideological mould. It is rooted in our own history, our
 culture, our realities. Gandhiji enjoined us to work for the Daridra Narayan,
 to wipe every tear from every eye. This constitutes the moral imperative
 of our socialism.”
 185. This is also the message that this Budget seeks to convey. Sir, I now
commend this budget to the House.
 [29th February, 1988]



 34

