 PART B
 26. I come now to, my taxation proposals. Before 1 refer to them, may I
repeat what I have stressed from time to time that taxation policy no longer serves the
sole objective of raising resources for the exchequer. In w planned economy, it must
also serve the wider objectives of augmenting savings, promoting exports, of bringing
about a better balance between the supply and demand for individual commodities
and indeed of social justice in distributing the rewards and sacrifices implicit in planned
progress. Further, all these objectives have to be reconciled with an eye not only to the
immediate future, but also to the long-term perspective we have kept before ourselves.
No less important a consideration is that the administration of the tax laws should
cause the minimum of vexation both to the tax payer and to the tax collector and one
thing that should not be taxed is people’s patience.
CORPORATION AND INCOME TAXES
 27. I shall begin with the direct taxes. I propose to increase the rate of tax on
Indian companies from 45 per cent to 50 per cent while the rate of tax on foreign
 7

companies will continue at 63 per cent generally. For this purpose, the rate of income-tax
applicable to all companies is being raised from 20 per cent to 25 per cent the rates of
super-tax being suitably adjusted. This will mean that the State will now get half the
profits of joint stock companies as against 45 per cent in the recent past. I, however,
propose to exclude earnings from exports from this increase. This is necessary because
profit margins on exports are relatively low and we want to give every inducement to
trade and industry to sell abroad.
 28. It will be necessary, with the increase in the level of corporation tax, to
make some reduction in inter-corporate taxation because when one company pays a
dividend to another, the same profit is liable to corporation tax twice. In the case of
Indian companies the rate including super-tax applicable to dividends received from
Indian subsidiary companies registered before 1-4-1961 will continue at 30 per cent,
while that on dividends received from all other Indian companies will be reduced to
35 per cent. Indian companies in which the public are substantially interested and
whose income does not exceed Rs.25,000 will continue to get a further concession of
5 per cent. In the case of foreign companies which have not made the prescribed
arrangements for the declaration and payment of dividends within India, the rate
applicable to dividends received from Indian subsidiary companies registered before
1-4-1961 will continue at 30 per cent; on dividends received from a non-subsidiary
Indian company registered before 1-4-1959, it will be reduced from 63 per cent to 50
Per cent while on dividends received from other Indian companies, it will be reduced
from 40 per cent to 35 per cent. As a result of these changes, corporation tax will yield
an additional revenue of Rs.10.25 crores.
 29. I also propose to tighten the schedule of admissible entertainment expenses
introduced last year. Though this will not bring any appreciable additional revenue, I
expect it to restrain conspicuous entertainment at company expense.
 30. I have taken the opportunity of reviewing personal taxation of all kinds. I
have come to the conclusion that while the richer sections of the community must pay
more, there is room for some simplification and relief at particular points. Accordingly,
it is proposed to revise the schedule of rates of income-tax and super-tax on individuals,
Hindu undivided families and unregistered firms. The income-tax payers form a
relatively well to do section of the society. In a population of 443 millions, they are
under a million and thus are a microscopic group. It is only natural that they should
bear a share of the tax burden in keeping with this privileged position. In this context,
rates of income-taxes on corresponding incomes in different countries are often
compared. This is, however, not meaningful as conditions differ widely. In any case,
proper comparison can only be of the incidence of total tax burden on different groups
with the same relative position in each society.
 31. In the revised rate structure of income and super-tax the rate at the highest
slab will be 72.5 per cent exclusive of the surcharges while the rate on incomes below

 8

Rs.5000 will remain unchanged. The intermediate slabs have been suitably adjusted
to secure an even increase in rate. Honourable members will recall that various studies
have stressed the fact that at intermediate and lower levels of income, our tax rates are
comparatively low but in view of the limited span of income spread, they rise steeply.
While this is to an extent inevitable in our circumstances, the changes I have proposed
will bring about an improvement over the present position.
 32. I am conscious that income-tax weighs a little more heavily on salaried
classes than on others. I, therefore, propose to reduce the surcharge on income-tax on
salaries, which also include pensions, from 5 per cent to 2.5 per cent leaving other
surcharges unchanged. The rate at the highest slab inclusive of surcharge will be 87
per cent. It is proposed to raise the exemption limit for Provident Fund contributions
and insurance premia to Rs.10,000. As I have mentioned earlier, it is also proposed to
liberalise and widen Cumulative Time Deposit Scheme with the benefit of income-tax
exemption which can be taken advantage of by self-employed and uninsurable persons.
These measures will give some relief to individuals without reducing the resources
available for development.
 33. It is also proposed to revise the structure of rates of tax on registered
firms by reducing the limit of exemption, revising the number of slabs and the rates of
tax and having higher rates for firms with five or more partners.
 34. All these measures taken together are expected to yield annual revenue of
a little over Rs.15
CAPITAL GAINS
 35. Capital gains are already taxable under our income-tax Act. The incidence,
is, however, restricted in the case of non-company assessees to income-tax only,
calculated in the prescribed manner. In an equitable system of taxation, capital gains
realised during a short period and those not so realised require to be treated differently.
It is necessary to secure broad equity in the treatment of different categories of tax
payers. In a number of cases, it is not possible to establish certain incomes as arising
out of business but they are nonetheless of a similar nature. Gains realised through
purchase and sale of capital assets within a short period fall in this category. I have
proposed that gains which result from disposal of capital assets within a period of one
year from the date of acquisition shall be made subject to income-tax and super-tax
like other ordinary incomes. Capital gains for assessees other than companies from
assets held over a period longer than one year will be subject to income-tax at the rate
of 25 per cent or at the rate applicable as if they were short term gains, whichever is
less. Long term capital gains of companies will continue to be taxed at the rate of 30
per cent. This will yield a revenue of Rs.50 lakhs half of which is expected to be
realised from companies.
 9

EXPENDITURE TAX
 36. I propose to abolish the five year old Expenditure Tax with effect from
the current year. When it was introduced in 1957, it was realised that it had no backing
of historical experience. It was, however, hoped that the tax would be a potent
instrument for restraining ostentatious expenditure and for promoting savings. While
these are very desirable objectives, experience has shown that the existence of the
Expenditure Tax has contributed little to them. The revenue from this source has
remained conspicuously small. It has been argued that the incorporation of an
Expenditure Tax in the tax structure would make the administration of income-tax a
great deal more effective and would enable the rates of income-tax to be lowered
suitably. Experience has not shown this to be the case. If the working of this tax had
shown some Promising results, it would have been worth while to continue and even
extend it; but with the present experience, it is considered best not to continue a
measure which, as a source of economic restraint, has been ineffective and as a source
of revenue unattractive. The basic objectives of the tax have to be achieved in other
ways. This will mean a reduction in revenue of the order of Rs.70 lakhs during 1962-63.
WEALTH TAX
 37. It is proposed to increase the Wealth Tax rates by .25 per cent and .5 per
cent on the two highest slabs and to revise the slab structure a little. It is also proposed
to discontinue the exemption on shares held in new companies during the first five
years allowed at present under the Wealth Tax Act. This is expected to yield an
additional revenue of Rs.2 crores per annum
 38. The net effect of all the changes in direct taxes in a full year will be an
increase of Rs.27.2 crores in our revenue.
UNION EXCISE DUTIES
 39. Turning to indirect taxes, it is only natural that a major share should come
from the Union Excise duties. I propose to revise the rates of excise duty on
unmanufactured tobacco and cigarettes which would yield a revenue of Rs.5.28 crores
in a full year. While the general rates are being increased by only small amounts, it is
proposed to re-classify tobacco granule (rawa) in keeping with its more general use
and also to re-group, cigarette price slabs.
 40. I also propose to revise the general structure of duty on cotton cloth and
yarn. The present rates of duty on yarn are 10 and 15 naye paise per kilogram. The
incidence of this duty per metre of cloth is less on superfine cloth as compared to
coarse cloth. This is not an equitable position. It is proposed to revise the yarn rates
in such a way as to achieve a slight progression in the incidence of tax according to
the quality of cloth, maintaining the present duty on coarse yarn at 10 naye paise.
The differential of 10 naye paise per kilogram in favour of yarn issued in hanks will
continue. It is also proposed to step up the duty on processing of cloth, keeping in
view the improvement in quality and price of cloth as a result of processing.

 10

Operations like mercerising, shrink proofing and organdie processing substantially
enhance the quality as compared to bleaching, dyeing and printing and should attract
relatively higher rates of duty. With these two aspects in view and to secure that the
common man has not to make anything more than a marginal adjustment in his cloth
bill on coarse and medium cloth which he normally uses, it is proposed to reduce
the duty on grey unbleached cotton fabrics. It is also proposed to place units with 50
or more powerlooms on the same footing as composite mills. Rates of compounded
levy on powerloom units with looms from 5 to 49 are also proposed to be increased
so as to graduate the increase in benefit with the reduction in size and to reduce the
incentive for splitting of units. Units employing 4 looms or less will be exempt. AS
a result of these changes, the annual revenue from cotton cloth and yarn will increase
by Rs.12. I crores.
 41. It has been found by experience that match boxes of 50 sticks are being
sold at 6 naye paise a box. As local taxes and conditions vary a little, the actual price
to a retail dealer so works out that in several areas he cannot sell at 5 naye paise a box
without incurring a loss, whereas at 6 naye paise a box he makes an excessive profit.
In view of this, it is proposed to revise the duty fixed by notification so as to wipe out
this unintended margin, the statutory rates remaining unchanged. This will yield a
revenue of Rs.1.99 crores per annum.
 42. It is proposed to convert the duty on unprocessed woolen, rayon and art
silk fabrics to a duty on yarn and processing, so as to release the powerlooms from
excise control. The loss in revenue will be made good partly by an increase in duty on
yarn and partly by a duty on processed fabrics. As a result of these changes, only a
small number of units will need excise control in future. As a fair quantity of yarn is
imported, these changes will result in a loss of Rs.50 lakhs in the revenue from excise
duty but there will be a net increase in revenue of Rs.1.16 crores on account of
increased countervailing duty on yarn.
 43. The present definition of patent and proprietary medicines which
followed the Drugs Act has been producing some anomalies. The Drugs Act definition
while suitable for medical purposes excludes from the scope of patent and proprietary
medicines quite a few preparations which are sold under proprietary names and
marks and are priced accordingly. I have, therefore, proposed a more suitable
definition. With this widening of the definition I propose to reduce the incidence of
tax from 10 to 7.5 per cent by a notification and also to exempt totally certain highly
essential drugs.
 44. It is also proposed to alter the tariff item of asphalt and bitumen so as to
include coal-tar, which is used for similar purposes. Coal-tar burnt in furnaces of
plants producing it will be exempted by notification. It is also proposed to revise some
of the exemptions which have either outlived their utility or have been found to be
open to abuse. It is proposed to simplify the procedure for duty on copper and other

 11

alloys for convenience of smaller manufacturers. It is also proposed to increase the
duty on aluminium foil by Rs.100 per tonne in order to discourage its internal
consumption which creates a demand for the import of ingots. In order to encourage
export of tea, it is proposed to increase the duty on loose tea by 5 to 10 naye paise per
kilogram and to give a rebate of 15 naye paise per kilogram on its export.
 45. These changes in the existing excise duties will give a revenue of Rs.20.74
crores in a full
 46. I also propose to levy excise duty on some new items. It is proposed to
levy a duty on jute manufactures in order to restrict their internal consumption and to
encourage their exports. This will yield a revenue of Rs.3.12 crores. It is also proposed
to levy an ad valorem duty of 5 to 7.5 per cent on certain iron and steel products but
to exempt wastages arising in the manufacture of these products from raw iron or
steel. Net revenue as a result of this will be Rs.6 crores. It is proposed to levy a duty
of 5 to 15 per cent on electric cables and wires which will yield a revenue of Rs.2.1
crores. It is proposed to impose a duty on specific acids and gases which will together
yield a revenue of Rs.1.64 crores. Other items on which I propose to levy an excise
duty are plywood at the rate of 10 to 15 per cent, asbestos cement products at the rate
of 10 per cent, tread rubber and latex foam sponge at the rate of 20 per cent,
gramophones, gramophone parts and accessories and gramophone records at rates
varying from 15 to 30 per cent. These items will yield a revenue of Rs.2.30 crores. In
the mineral oil section I propose to add a levy at 5 per cent on mineral oils and mineral
oil products not otherwise specified. On the present production this will bring in a
revenue of Rs.26 lakhs. The total revenue from the fresh levies will be Rs.15.42
crores in a full year.
CUSTOMS DUTIES
 47. The changes in the rates of excise duties and the imposition of fresh
duties I have just described will yield a revenue of Rs.7.25 crores on the Customs side
from countervailing duties.
 48. I propose to increase import duties on certain iron and steel items and on
art silk yarn by 5 per cent. This will yield a revenue of Rs.2.16 crores. The main items
affected by the increase under iron and steel are structures, fittings for pipes and
tubes, tin plates, steel ingots and manufactures not otherwise specified. In the case of
tin plates, the increase will, however, be only 2 per cent. I also propose to impose an
import duty of 25 per cent on stainless steel plates and sheets and rods and bars. This
will yield a revenue of Rs.80 lakhs. Copra is subject to an import duty of 40 per cent
standard and 30 per cent preferential but by a notification they have been reduced to
15 per cent standard and 5 per cent preferential. It is proposed to increase the notified
rates to 25 per cent and 15 per cent which will still be well within the ceilings. It is
found that as compared to Indian copra, there is a substantial price advantage in
imported copra. It is also proposed to increase the duty on certain types of tools,

 12

excluding machine tools and agricultural implements, from 35 per cent to 50 per cent.
This is in line with certain increases made last year. These two items will yield a
revenue of Rs.1.89 crores in a full year. It is also proposed to rationalise duties on a
few items which will yield a small revenue of Rs.7 lakhs only.
 49. It is proposed to raise the rate of import duty on cars from 100 to 150 per
cent. The specific duty of Rs.6000 is, however, being done away with so as not to
discourage import of small or used cars in genuine cases. Though there are no regular
imports of cars, some cars continue to come into the country, on Customs clearance
permits. As their number is small, their outside value is high and when they are sold,
there are very large profits. The proposed increase in duty will reduce these profits
and will make import of cars a little less attractive. The revenue from this will be
about Rs.25 lakhs.
 50. Having spoken so far about increases, I now refer to a substantial reduction.
I propose to reduce the export duty on tea from 44 naye paise to 25 naye paise per
kilogram. This will mean a loss of revenue of Rs.4.1 crores. Taken with the proposed
refund of excise duty of 15 naye paise per kilogram, this should provide a substantial
incentive for export of tea.
 51. These proposals on indirect taxes side will bring in a revenue of Rs.44.5
crores in a full year. Daring 1962-63, their effect will, however, be for 342 days that
is to the extent of 93.7 per cent.
NET EFFECT OF THE PROPOSALS
 52. These changes in direct and indirect taxation taken together will bring in
a revenue of Rs.71.7 crores in a full year, of which Rs.44.5 crores will be from indirect
taxation and Rs.27.2 crores from direct taxation. Both direct and indirect taxation thus
play a part in my proposals. This question of the respective roles of direct and indirect
taxation is being raised on a number of occasions. There seems to be a feeling in some
quarters that whereas direct taxes are progressive indirect taxes are regressive in the
sense that their incidence falls more heavily on the poor than on the rich. I am afraid
this view that indirect taxes are regressive is not correct in our conditions. Whether
indirect taxes hit the poor more than the rich or vice versa depends upon the kind of
commodities that are subjected to indirect taxes and the rates at which they are taxed.
No one would contend that excise duties on automobiles, refrigerators and air-
conditioners, for example, hit the poor. Quite a number of items in our range of
indirect taxes are such that they impinge more heavily on the upper middle and middle
classes. We had this whole question analysed last year and our study shows that
indirect taxes in India have been progressive in their incidence. That is to say, the
higher the total expenditure of a family on an average the higher the proportion of the
total expenditure it pays in indirect taxes. Not only that, but the degree of progression
also was shown to have increased as more and more articles not entering appreciably
in common man’s consumption were subjected to excise duty.

 13

 53. Hon’ble Members would also appreciate that in a country like India, the
income-tax cannot be a mass tax. That would be administratively impossible and
indeed irksome to the vast majority of the poorer people. At the same time, we have
to tax at least to some extent even those who are not covered by income-tax, for it
would be equally impossible to meet all our requirements for both plan and non-plan
expenditures without mobilising a part of the incomes that accrue to the poorer sections
of the community. Undoubtedly, the richer sections must carry an increasingly larger
share of taxation and poorer sections must benefit progressively more through
development. That is part of our concept of a socialist state.
 54. I am aware of the wide-spread desire in this House and outside that the
imposition and enhancement of excise duties should not lead to a general increase in
consumer prices. In some cases, duties are imposed as there is a large margin of profit
and it is considered desirable to reduce that margin. In others, for example, as in the
case of matches this year, the duty is meant to take away the unintended margins of
middle-men. In these cases, there should be no increase in the price to the consumer.
On the other hand in a case like that of patent and proprietary medicines, where it is
proposed to reduce the duty, there should be a reduction in prices. In the case of cloth,
a part of the increase in the rates of duty on yarn and processed fabrics can as well as
absorbed by the industry. The duty on coarse and lower medium fabrics has been
particularly so adjusted that there should be no increase in the price of such cloth.
 55. As regards the impact of these duties on exports, I should like to mention
that it is proposed to give a consolidated refund of excise duties paid on the materials
and intermediates used in the process of manufacture. There is, therefore, no reason
why excise duties should impinge on export costs.
 56. The taxation proposals outlined above would yield a total revenue of
Rs.68.88 crores during 1962-63. Of this, a sum of Rs.60.80 crores will accrue to the
Centre and the balance of Rs.8.08 crores to the States as their share as a result of the
recommendations of the Finance Commission accepted by Government. This share
will go on increasing from year to year. The manner in which these gains to the States
should be adjusted in keeping with the overall requirements of the Centre and the
States for fulfilling their plans is under consideration. The Planning Commission intends
to review shortly the financial position of the States during the current year in
consultation with them.
CONCLUSION
 57. As a result of the tax proposals I have placed before this House, there will
be a net accretion of Rs.60.80 crores to the Centre during 1962-63. This would
completely wipe out the revenue deficit. The overall deficit will consequently be
reduced from Rs.150 crores to Rs.89 crores and will be met by the expansion of
Treasury Bills.
 14

 58. I cannot say that I am happy with the gap which still remains. It is my
hope that as in the past with increased incomes and production and with a tighter
cheek on tax evasion our taxes will bring in more than we are able to foresee at
present. In this context, I would emphasise that we can no longer go along with
out-moded concept of taxation being limited to what is needed to cover the revenue
component of the budget. In the context of the major development programmes on
which the public sector is engaged and having regard to the possibilities and limitations
of borrowing from the market it is essential that the revenue budget should provide a
sizeable surplus to sustain a part of the capital budget. In fact during the Second
Five-Year Plan we achieved a revenue surplus of the order of Rs.220 crores without
which the upward pull on the price level would have been far greater. In putting
forward my tax proposals, therefore, I have paid greater heed to the over-all target of
taxation for the Third Plan which as the House is aware is Rs.1100 crores. The additional
taxation levied at the Centre last year should yield a total of about Rs.450 crores over
the Five-Year period. The taxes which I have proposed today will take us yet closer to
our goal of raising adequate resources for our Plan. It is a matter of concern to me that
progress in regard to additional taxation by the States has been slow and in 1961-62
the State Budgets provided for additional taxation with a five year yield of about
Rs.100 crores only as against the target of Rs.610 crores set in the Plan. I would
earnestly request all State Governments to ensure that this shortfall is made up with
speed and vigour.
 59. Higher levels of taxation no doubt impose a burden of sacrifice on our
people. The point to remember is that there are only two alternatives to such taxation-
inflation or stagnation. Without the requisite tax effort we would have to face either
an upsurge of prices which would impose a much bigger and much less equitable
burden on the community, or a prolongation of our poverty due to a slowing down of
our development. It is against this background that I would ask the House to consider
and support my budget proposals.
 (April 23, 1962)




 15

