 PART B
 MOBILISATION OF RESOURCES
 52. In the Budget Estimates that I have just presented, the availability of
resources will be higher by Rs.101 crores and expenditures by Rs.143 crores in
relation to the interim Budget. I should, however, explain that I have chosen on this
occasion, for reasons of security, to mention some of the facts in Part B of the
Budget Speech only.
 53. On the expenditure side, I have not so far provided anything additional
for assistance to the financial institutions. In the interim Budget, a provision of Rs.30
crores was made for this purpose. This is sufficient for enabling these institutions to
honour all their existing commitments as well as to meet disbursements on new
commitments in respect of the priority sectors of fertilizers, alloy and tool steel and
the like. However, some additional provision for these institutions is necessary if they
are to play a reasonable part in supporting private investment activity and thereby
helping the revival of the investment goods industries. I, therefore, propose to provide
an additional sum of Rs.10 crores for the financial institutions. In a Budget of this
magnitude, It is also necessary to make a provision for contingencies. Taking account
of all the considerations, I estimate that the deficit of the Centre, without any further
mobilisation of resources, would be of the order of Rs.68 crores.
 14

 54. By far the best way of mobilising resources is to economise on Government
expenditure without sacrificing efficiency. I have already set in motion a thorough
examination of the expenditure patterns of all Central Ministries. Already, some
decisions have been taken which will reduce the strength of my own Ministry. Similar
decisions in respect of other Ministries will be announced as they are taken. In respect
of Government projects, the Bureau of Public Enterprises will keep a constant watch
in order to secure genuine economies. I do not propose, however, to take any credit at
this stage for reduction in Government expenditure as a result of the economy drive
that I propose to pursue vigorously. In matters like this, It is best to take credit for
success only when success has already been achieved.
 55. Better collection of existing taxes is also an important and indeed most
equitable way of mobilising additional resources. This is a continuing programme
where constant endeavours have to be made to improve tax administration as, well as
tax laws. In this connection, we have been experimenting for some time with a new
system of distribution of work in the income-tax Department. Under this system,
particular functions such as those of assessment, collection, refunds, etc., are performed
by the income-tax Officers specifically entrusted with these functions. This experiment
has shown encouraging results. To facilitate the extension of the functional system, I
propose to make specific provisions in the law and I am circulating separately a detailed
note on the subject for the information of Honourable Members. I propose, however,
to take only a small credit for better collection of income-tax this year, as It is premature
to expect any sizeable gain in the early stages of the operation of the scheme.
 56. It is also desirable to rely to the maximum extent on mobilisation of
private savings for meeting the requirements of the Government. In the present
conditions in the country, however, It would not be prudent to take credit for anything
more than what I have done in the interim Budget under small savings market
borrowings and the like. At a later stage, I shall refer to one or two fiscal concessions
which I propose to give in order to promote savings. But these measures are designed
with an eye on the long run rather than on improving the budgetary position during the
current year itself.
EXPORT DUTIES
 57. Coming to taxation proper, the mostimportant changes involving a loss in
revenue that I have to announce relate to export duties. Our exports of jute manufactures
have declined in the recent past and some of the promising lines are being threatened
with competition from substitutes. I propose, therefore, to reduce the duty on sacking
(other than cotton bagging) by Rs.150 per tonne, on carpet backing and jute specialities
by Rs.300 per tonne and on the other hessians by Rs.150 per tonne. The effect of these
reductions would be a loss of revenue of Rs.13.50 crores in a full year.
 58. A reduction of Rs.7.50 per tonne has been proposed in the export duty on
manganese ore having 10 per cent or more but not more than 48 per cent of manganese
content, mainly with a view to offset the effect of the recent increase in railway freight
 15

on manganese ore. A marginal reduction of Rs.1 per tonne is also being made in the
export duty on iron ore fines (including blue dust). These changes will result in a loss
of revenue of Rs.83 lakhs in a full year., A change is also being made in respect of the
duty on tea to which I shall refer later.
DIRECT TAXES
 59. In respect of direct taxes, I propose to give a number of selective and
indeed minor concessions. The main concessions in respect of taxes on personal incomes
are as follows:
 (a) In our society, many of us have to maintain dependent parents or grand
 parents. I propose, therefore, to grant a fixed allowance of Rs.400 for
 maintenance of one or more of the dependent parents or grand parents in
 the case of resident individuals having a total income not exceeding
 Rs.10,000. The tax relief on this allowance will be calculated at the rate
 of 5 per cent applicable to the initial slab of income. This allowance will
 be available only when the dependent parent or grand parent does not
 have personal income exceeding Rs.1000 in the year. This concession is
 estimated to cost approximately Rs.2 crores.
 (b) At present we levy a surcharge on unearned income in excess of Rs.15,000.
 I propose to raise this exemption limit to Rs.30,000. In a sense, the principle
 of taxing income from investments at a rate higher than income from
 work runs counter to the desirability of increased savings. I have, therefore,
 sought to take this into account at least partially this year. This concession
 will mean a loss of Rs.75 lakhs.
 (c) I propose that all tax-payers having dividend incomes not exceeding Rs.500
 during the year be allowed to exclude from their taxable income the whole
 of the dividend income received by them from Indian companies. This
 should encourage equity investment by tax-payers in the lower and middle
 income groups. The revenue loss of this measure is estimated at Rs.1.50
 crores.
 (d) The present limit of the amount of approved savings in life insurance,
 Government and recognised provident funds and cumulative time deposits
 in Post Offices, which qualify for tax relief in the case of individuals and
 Hindu Undivided families, is proposed to be increased from 25 per cent
 of the total income to 30 per cent of the total income. The monetary limits
 of Rs.12,500 in the case of individuals and Rs.25,000 in the case of Hindu
 undivided families will also be raised, simultaneously, to Rs.15,000 and
 Rs.30,000 respectively.
 (e) Given our present need for resources, I have found it necessary to continue
 the Annuity Deposit Scheme. I have, however, made some marginal
 modifications in the Scheme. For example, people over the age of 60 need
 16

 not make a deposit; at present, the age limit is 70 years. Similarly, for all
 assessees, no penal tax will apply in case of shortfalls in deposits upto
 Rs.100 or upto 10 per cent of the deposits required to be made.
 (f) Indian scientists, professors and research workers who spend a part of the
 year in foreign universities or other educational or scientific institutions
 will be allowed, subject to certain conditions, to deduct from their taxable
 income 50 per cent of the remuneration received by them from foreign
 sources.
 60. I will now summarise some of the concessions-again, selective and
minor-that I propose to give in respect of corporate taxation:
 (a) As a measure of relief to small-scale industries in the corporate sector. I
 propose to extend the concessional rate of 45 per cent to widely-held
 domestic companies having total incomes not exceeding Rs.50,000 as
 against Rs.25,000 at present. This is likely to result in a loss to revenue of
 about Rs.18 lakhs.
 (b) As a tourist promotion measure, I propose to extend the priority industry
 treatment to approved hotels run by Indian companies. Further, I propose
 to provide for the allowance of initial depreciation of hotel buildings
 constructed by such companies after the 31st March 1967 in an amount of
 25 per cent of their cost of construction. Some other relaxations are also
 proposed in favour of the hotel industry.
 (c) It has often been represented that our present tax-holiday concession does
 not benefit adequately those undertakings for which profitability is usually
 low in the initial years. In order to make the tax exemption more meaningful
 in such cases, I propose to allow a carry-forward of the unabsorbed benefit
 of the ‘tax-holiday’ relating to the assessment year 1967-68, onwards,
 upto eight years from the year of commencement of the business.
 (d) The existing tax law has certain features which inhibit desirable
 amalgamations of companies by attracting certain liabilities on such
 amalgamation. Merging of uneconomic units is desirable in order to
 improve productivity and realise economies of scale. I propose to facilitate
 this process by removing the existing disabilities in the matter in the law.
 (e) The progress in resettlement of displaced persons from East Pakistan and
 repatriates from Burma, Ceylon and certain East African countries has
 been painfully slow. To supplement the efforts made in this direction by
 the State Governments, it is proposed, subject to some conditions, to allow
 industrial units employing such displaced persons and repatriates to deduct
 50 per cent of their profits in computing their taxable income.

 17

 (f) I also propose to provide certain tax concessions to industries damaged or
 destroyed by enemy action or by natural calamities.
 (g) In order to promote scientific research in our country, I propose to enhance
 the rate of development rebate on machinery and plant installed for scientific
 research after the 31st March 1967, from the existing general rate of 20 per
 cent, to the priority rate of 35 per cent. Further, the whole of the capital
 expenditure incurred after the 31st March, 1967 on assets used for scientific
 research 111 be allowed as a deduction in the year in which It is incurred.
 61. The combined effect of the various concessions in direct taxes that I have
listed will be a reduction in revenue of about Rs.5 crores in a full year. I do not
propose, however, to take any debit for this item as a reduction in revenue of this
order should be made up by better tax collection assisted by the proposed extension
over a wider area of deduction of taxes at source.
 62. In addition to the changes in direct taxes which I have described, a few
other changes are proposed in the Finance Bill which are intended either to continue
the existing concessions or to clarify the intentions of the present law. I do not propose
to describe these here as they are set out in detail in the explanatory memorandum on
the Finance Bill.
 63. Some time back Government appointed Shri S.Bhoothalingam, formerly
Secretary. Ministry of Finance, as a one-man Committee for recommending measures
for simplifying and rationalising the existing structure of direct and indirect taxation.
Shri Bhoothalingam recently submitted his first interim Report, which relates
exclusively to direct taxes, particularly income tax. Copies of this Report will be
made available to Honourable Members as soon as possible. Apart from simplification
and rationalisation, the Report also suggests a reconsideration of some of the policy
aspects of the present tax structure. In a sense, major modifications in the tax structure
should not be made in one area, without examining similar suggestions for application
to other areas. It is also desirable that on substantive issues, this Honourable House,
expert public opinion and people at large should have an opportunity to express their
views before Government makes up its mind. I propose, therefore, to publish also the
subsequent reports of Shri Bhoothalingam. It is my intention that the publication of
these reports will provide an occasion for Parliament and for others to discuss some
of the basic aspects of the tax structure so that it can be put on a sound and progressive
basis as soon as possible. It is, for this reason, quite apart from the difficult financial
situation in the current year, that I have decided to restrict my proposals for modification
in the direct tax structure to a minimum. It is my intention, however, to introduce even
in the present Budget some of the measures of rationalisation and simplification which
have been recommended in the interim Report.
 64. One of the main recommendations is that changes in the tax laws and rates
of taxation should be applied prospectively to current incomes. The existing practice of
 18

applying the rates of tax to incomes already earned in the past year, which has been
followed over a long period of years, is not sound in principle. The annual Finance Acts
not only prescribe rates of tax but often provide incentives or disincentives in various
directions. Such incentives or disincentives can obviously be meaningful only if they are
applied prospectively. Apart from this consideration, it stands to reason that the tax-payer
should know before hand his tax liability for any given income year. I propose, therefore,
to apply the several measures for making changes in the tax laws as also in the tax rates,
prospectively, to current incomes which will fall due for assessment next year, except
where it is felt that a particular measure calls for retrospective application for special
reasons. We also propose to consider seriously the recommendations about adopting a
standard tax year co-terminous with the financial year.
 65. Another measure recommended for simplifying tax calculations is the
elimination of most of the areas in which calculations of rebates and reliefs have to be
made at present by applying the average rate of tax on the total income. In these areas,
I propose to make provisions for allowing a straight deduction of the whole or a
specified proportion of the income qualifying for the rebate or relief in computing the
taxable income. Similar provisions will also be made for calculating rebate of tax on
charitable donations. Donations to the Prime Minister’s Drought Relief Fund will be
added to the categories of donations which at present qualify for tax relief without the
operation of the ceiling limit of 10 per cent of the total income or Rs.2 lakhs, which
applies to ordinary charitable donations.
 66. There is only one other significant change in respect of direct taxes, which
I might mention here. At present, tax is withheld at source in the case of Indian residents
out of their income consisting only of salaries, interest on securities, or dividends. In
order to improve and speed up the collection of tax, it is proposed to extend, in the case
of residents, the requirement of deduction of tax at source to interest on deposits, loans
or other borrowings as well as to fees for professional services and brokerage and
commission payable by banks, companies and other organised entitles. However, in
order to avoid hardship, certain exemptions are being provided.
POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS
 67. As the House is aware, the Postal and Telegraph Branches of the Posts
and Telegraphs Department have been working at a loss. Most of the services we
provide on the Postal side are unremunerative. The cost of services has increased
appreciably during recent years. To meet the loss partially, It is proposed to raise
slightly the rate of postage on parcels, registered newspapers, book packets etc., as
also to raise the registration fee and fees for express delivery, insurance and air mail
fee on packets. The additional annual revenue expected from these increases in the
postal rates is about Rs.1.84 crores. On the Telegraph side, it is proposed to raise the
minimum charge on an ordinary Greetings telegram and the rate for Express Greetings
telegram. The existing rate for non-Press inland telegrams will remain unchanged but
the minimum charge will be for the first 8 words instead of first 10 words as at
 19

present. The rental for a teleprinter machine is proposed to be raised and revision is
also proposed in the rental for part-time telegraph and teleprinter circuits other than
those given to the Press. (Details of the principal changes in the Posts and Telegraphs
tariffs are given in a separate memorandum). These measures are expected to yield an
annual revenue of Rs.1.02 crores. Opportunity has also been taken to rationalise the
tariffs for various telephone services and make certain minor revisions therein. The
additional annual revenue from the various changes proposed in the telephone tariffs
is expected to amount to Rs.1.58 crores.
 68. The proposed changes in the Postal, Telegraph and Telephone rates will
not come into effect immediately. The dates from which they will be operative will be
notified later. These changes will yield Rs.4.44 crores in a full year and Rs.3 crores in
the rest of the current year. As however, the Posts and Telegraph Revenue is not now
expected to come upto the interim Budget Estimate, I am taking credit for an additional
Rs.1 crore only on this account.
EXCISE AND CUSTOMS
 69. I turn now to my proposals in regard to Union Excise Duties. The large
number of changes that I have made in direct taxes will not make any significant
difference to the Government’s budgetary position. Import duties have been rationalised
on a number of occasions in the recent past including at the time of devaluation last
June. Honourable Members will recall that although the import tariff was adjusted to
take account of the higher rupee cost of imports, the total incidence of devaluation
and import tariff was such as to increase substantially the rupee cost of all Imports
including the import of machinery, raw materials and spares. It is not desirable to give
another jolt to the economy by any further increases in import duties. It is, therefore,
inevitable that I should essentially increase the Union Excise Duties for raising
additional revenues in order to balance the Budget after allowing for the effect of the
reduction in export duties.
 70. have, however, endeavoured to adjust excise duties in such a way that
apart from raising additional resources, these adjustments will be consistent with the
requirements of the current economic situation. Thus, in the main, I have endeavoured
to increase duties on those Items where (a) it is necessary to exercise some restraint on
domestic consumption in order to augment export earnings, or (b) where high profits
are made by industry and trade at present or (c) where some increase in prices cannot
be considered socially undesirable. In particular, I have sought to ensure that prices of
essential consumer goods are not affected and that the demand for those industries
which are already saddled with considerable excess capacity is, not further depressed.
Altogether, additional excise duties are proposed to be levied on only a limited range
of selected Items so that the price situation is not disturbed at many points. This
explains in part the sizeable increases that I propose in a few cases.
 71. I propose to raise the excise duties on coffee and tea so that the internal
consumption of these is restrained and more quantities are made available for export.
 20

These increases will yield a revenue of Rs.8.40 crores in a fun year without taking
into account the revenue loss from reduction in the export duties on tea to neutralise
the effect of the higher excise on export shipments. In the case of tea, the increase
proposed is lower on cheaper tea than on the higher priced teas from Zones III, IV and
V. Similarly, the increase on the cheaper Robusta or Liberia variety of coffee is less
than on superior varieties like Arabica.
 72. Another export item on which I propose to increase the duty is jute
manufactures. The existing basic excise duties on hessians and other jute manufactures
which are Rs.250 and Rs.125 per tonne respectively are being raised to Rs.375 and
Rs.175 per tonne. The effect of this will be an additional revenue of Rs.3.00 crores
annually. As usual, the duties will be rebated on export shipments.
 73. As for tea exports, the effect of higher excise duties on exports will be
neutralised by a reduction in export duties by 24 paise per kilogram. While this will
fully offset the burden of the excise duty increase on the higher priced varieties, the
inferior teas from Zones I and II will have a slight edge over the others as the export
duty reduction in their case will exceed the excise duty increases. While making this
reduction in the export duty, the rate schedule is also being simplified and rationalised
to obviate the practical difficulties in the present system of levy. The effect of the
reduction proposed will be a loss of Rs.4.68 crores annually so that in the net Rs.3.72
crores would be realised from tea and coffee in a full year.
 74. I propose to re-impose the duty on footwear and parts which have a good
export potential. This duty was withdrawn by an exemption as a part of the Budget
proposals of February 1965. As before, footwear made without the aid of power or in
small power operated establishments will continue to be exempted. This proposal will
yield an additional revenue of Rs.2.75 crores annually.
 75. It is necessary also to restrain the increasing consumption of cigarettes
which cuts into the exportable surplus available of cigarette tobacco, an important
foreign exchange earner. I, therefore, propose to raise substantially the duties on
cigarettes which would yield a revenue of Rs.28.50 crores annually. The increase
proposed on higher priced cigarettes will be more than on the cheaper varieties. Some
increase has been proposed also on cigars and cheroots, the yield from which will be
about one lakh of rupees. I realise that the increase proposed is high. But Honourable
Members and others can at least escape its incidence by reducing consumption and
thus perhaps prolonging their lives in the bargain.
 76. Honourable Members will recall that at the time of devaluation, excise
and customs duties on petroleum products were adjusted in such a way as to avoid any
increase in their price. This step meant a considerable loss of revenue for the
Government and was in fact on par with the subsidies given on foodgrains and fertilizers
at the time for the same purpose. Subsidies on, fertilizers have already been reduced.
I see no reason why the prices of some of the petroleum products also should not be
 21

allowed to rise, reflecting the effect of devaluation. I propose, therefore, to increase
the basic excise duty on motor spirit from Rs.451.05 per kilolitre to Rs.550 per kilolitre
and on refined diesel and vaporising oils from Rs.441.05 to Rs.461.05 per kilolitre.
The excise duty on petroleum products not otherwise specified is also proposed to be
increased from 10 per cent ad valorem to 20 per cent ad valorem. These increase on
mineral oil products will yield a revenue of Rs.25.60 crores annually. Honourable
Members would note that these changes will not result in any increase in the price of
kerosene, of diesel oil used by agriculturists or fuel oil which is used by industry. In
fact, the increase in the case of refined diesel oil is also marginal-of the order of 2
pales per litre.
 77. I come now to a few less essential Items of consumption where there is
scope for mopping up the high profits made or where even an increase in the price to
consumers will not be a great hardship. The basic excise duty on artificial or synthetic
resins and plastic materials is proposed to be raised from 20 per cent to 30 per cent ad
valorem which will yield an additional revenue of Rs.4.5 crores annually.
 78. Production of rayon and synthetic fibres and yarn has increased and the
margin of profit on these is also high. I, therefore, propose to make a substantial
increase in the excise duties. The increase on cellulosic fibres and yarn, such as viscose
rayon and acetate rayon will be lower than the increases proposed on non-cellulosic
fibres and yarn such as polyster fibre and nylon yarn. The effect of the increases
proposed will be an additional revenue of Rs.22 crores annually.
 79. The excise duty on aluminium has remained unchanged since 1960 and
there has been a substantial increase in the indigenous production in the recent years.
I propose to increase the basic excise duty on aluminium ingots from Rs.300 to Rs.950
per tonne on plates, sheets, circles and strips from Rs.500 to Rs.1450 per tonne, and
on foils from Rs.600 o Rs.2000 per tonne; the duties on pipes, tubes and extruded
shapes and sections are also being raised from 10 per cent to 20 per cent ad valorem.
These changes will bring in an additional revenue of Rs.10.98 crores annually.
 80. It is my expectation that in the case of aluminium, rayon and synthetic
fibres, it should be possible for producers to absorb the increase in the excise duties
without any increase in the prices charged to consumers in any event, producers of
these products will not be allowed to increase their present prices without prior
consultations with the Government. If, on examination, it is found that the additional
excise duties cannot be absorbed by producers without a change in the price charged
to consumers, we shall be prepared to take appropriate remedial action. However, It is
our intention to make sure that to the maximum extent possible, the incidence of
higher duties in these cases is absorbed in the profits made at present by producers
and distributors.
 81. The present structure of excise on cotton textiles allows such a high margin
of preference to powerlooms that it encourages tax avoidance. This has been pointed out
 22

by two successive Committees. I propose, therefore, to raise the excise duty on cotton
twist, yarn and thread Which go into the production of fine and superfine fabrics in the
powerloom sector. The increase win be mostly on sized yarn cleared in the form of sized
beams required for weaving in the powerloom factories. Rates of duty on sized yarn of
fine and superfine counts are proposed to be raised in such a way that the margin of
difference in the excise duty between powerloom and mill-made grey fabrics of fine and
superfine varieties is narrowed sufficiently. These changes will, however, not affect the
handloom sector as the duty on hank yarn is not being raised. The duty on mill fabrics
will also remain unchanged as the increase in the yarn compounded duty is being offset
by a corresponding reduction in the grey fabric duty, so that the cumulative effect leaves
the duty on fine and super fine grey fabrics unchanged. The effect of these changes will
be an additional revenue of Rs.7.80 crores annually.
 82. The only new Item on which excise duty is proposed to be imposed this
year is rubber piping, tubing and belting. These are being added to the item of rubber
products like latex foam sponge and tread rubber which are already excisable. The
proposed basic excise duty on these new rubber products will be 15 per cent ad
valorem which will yield an additional revenue of Rs.1.98 crores annually.
 83. Special excise duties will continue to be levied at the existing rates subject
to modifications consequent on the changes proposed in the basic excise duties outlined
earlier. The provision for levy of regulatory excise duty in the same manner as in
section 49 of the Finance Act, 1966 is being continued though there will be no levy of
this duty at present.
 84. The total effect of all the proposed changes in the excise duties will be an
additional revenue of Rs.115.52 crores in a full year out of which Rs.22.98 crores will
go to the States.
 85. I have not proposed any increase in the import duties. But wherever excise
duties have been increased or modified the countervailing duties on imported goods
equivalent to such increases will be chargeable in addition to the existing duties. In
the case, of Imported aluminium ingots and wire bars the increase in the countervailing
duty will not be to the full extent of the excise duty increases but will be lower by
R9.400 per tonne. The increases in countervalling duties will yield an additional revenue
of Rs.7.33 crores annually.
 86. I have already discussed earlier the reductions in export duties. Taking
into account the loss of Rs.19.01 crores annually under these Items and the increases
on account of countervailing duties, the net loss of customs revenue would be Rs.11.68
crores in a fun year. Taking excise duties and customs duties together, the total additional
revenue in the full year will be of the order of Rs.103.84 crores of which Rs.22.98
crores will go to the States and balance will accrue to the Centre. However, during the
current year, the changes in customs and excise duties will apply not for the full year
but only for a little over ten months. During the current year, therefore, the additional
 23

revenue accruing to the Centre will be of the order of Rs.68 crores. Changes in posts
and Telegraph rates will bring in Rs.1 crore. The additional revenues of about Rs.69
crores win more than cover the initial deficit of Rs.68 crores. Essentially, therefore,
the Budget that I am presenting now is a balanced one. Honourable Members would
also note that in addition to the substantially larger resources made available to the
States from the Central Budget, the State Governments will benefit subtantially to the
extent of almost Rs.20 crores by the taxation proposed here.
 87. I am well aware that I have been able to balance the Budget primarily by
keeping the Plan .outlays strictly in check. The provision for the Plan in the Budget,
for Central schemes, assistance to the States and to the financial institutions taken
together is not materially different from the level of the first year of the Fourth Plan.
At a time when essential consumer goods are in short supply and when it is difficult
to reduce subsidies, I could not have provided more for the Plan without jeopardising
the chances of restoring price stability. Considerable restraint has also been exercised
in regard to non-Plan outlays at the Centre, the bulk of which relate to interest payments
which are contractual obligations and to defence.
 88. To those who may have been looking forward to sizeable reductions in
taxation, I will say only this. As long as we in this Honourable House remain responsive
to the needs and aspirations of the poor and the downtrodden, there will always be
need for the Government, no matter what its persuasion, to command a growing volume
of resources from year to year. Some of the resources available to the Government at
present, such as the counterpart of PL 480 supplies of foodgrains etc., should not and
indeed cannot continue for long, Before giving any tax concessions, therefore, I would
like to be doubly sure that there is at least a reasonable chance of such a step contributing
to larger revenues by stimulating activity or savings in general. Under the present
circumstances, I see no clear prospect of this; but we will explore all possible avenues
of putting our tax structure on a sound, stable and progressive basis. My main
justification for the selective but sizeable increases in excise duties is that these are
necessary in the interest of exports and for avoiding too deep a cut in Plan outlays.
Indeed, even as it is, I do not feel happy about not being able to provide more for the
Plan than we did last year. That is why we propose to pursue a more positive policy
of encouraging public and private investment activity as soon as the basic supply
position in the country improves.
 89. In the meanwhile, I can only hope that this Budget wig contribute to the
restoration of 6 climate of stability which is so essential for sound and sustained
growth. We are determined also to redouble our efforts to provide a clean and efficient
administration. I have every confidence that at this difficult juncture, all sections of
the community-farmers, workers, businessmen and leaders of public opinion-will give
of their best so that the spell of stagnation which has been upon us for more than two
years how is lifted and we begin to move forward once again to our cherished goals.
 (May 25, 1967)
 24

