DIRECT TAXATION
 51. I turn now to direct taxation. Firstly, I propose to make certain adjustments
in personal income-tax and super-tax rates. Till now, these changes have followed a
standard pattern which, I think, needs a fundamental change. It is necessary to recognise
that the basic rates should apply to the person who earns his income, that is, sweats
and tolls for it, and that others who derive their income from property and investments,
that is, without making any direct effort should be made to pay more by a surcharge.
Under the present system there is no provision for earned income allowance for super-
tax. For income-tax there is an allowance of 20 per cent subject to a maximum of
Rs.4,000.for earned incomes not exceeding Rs.25,000. For incomes in excess of this
amount, the allowance of Rs.4,000 is reduced at the rate of 20 per cent of the excess
over Rs.25,000 so that for an earned income of Rs.45,000 the allowance is reduced to
nil. I now propose to change this system altogether, applying a standard schedule of
rates to all earned incomes and imposing a higher surcharge on unearned incomes. I
have come to the conclusion that our existing rates of direct tax at top levels deprive
the tax structure of all flexibility. It is said that they tend to diminish the incentive for
work but I am aware that they encourage large scale evasion. It is now recognised that
the very high rates of direct taxation in the top income brackets in many countries of
the world are in practice tolerated or tolerable only because of considerable evasion
that takes place. In other words, the high rates tend to be applied to a corroded tax
base. I now propose a revised schedule of these rates and introduce a new scheme of
surcharge levy which will mean that the total of the income-tax, super-tax and surcharge
 16

for the highest slab will be brought down from the existing level of 91.8 per cent to
84 per cent for unearned and 77 per cent for earned incomes. The surcharge will be 5
per cent on the tax computed at the standard schedule rates for earned incomes up to
Rs.1 lakh and 10 per cent on incomes in excess of that sum, For unearned incomes,
there will be a uniform surcharge of 20 per cent over the standard schedule rates.
When a person’s income is partly earned and partly unearned, the unearned income
will he considered to belong to the slab in which the earned income ends and to higher
slabs where necessary. The rates for, the lower slabs have been adjusted in keeping
with this change in respect of top slabs. To provide relief to the middle classes, I
propose that no surcharge on unearned income be levied where the total income does
not exceed Rs.7,500. The reduction in the rates of direct taxation will cost Exchequer
Rs.71/2 crores. This reduction should, however, be judged in the light of the other
changes in direct taxation which I mention later.
 52. I propose also to widen the present income-tax base by reducing the taxable
minimum from Rs.4,200 to Rs.3,000. The minimum limit had been raised over the
past few years mainly for administrative reasons. An income of Rs.4,200, modest
though it is in absolute terms, is quite a large multiple of the average level of incomes
in the country. It is reasonable to expect that those with an income over Rs.3,000
should also make their contribution, however small, to the public exchequer, and
should come within the range of direct taxation. As development proceeds, there will,
I expect, be a large and progressive increase in the number of incomes within this
range and I think it is essential if the Exchequer is to benefit proportionately from the
expansion i of incomes consequent on development, that these incomes are brought
within the income tax range. I, therefore, propose to place the exemption limit now at
Rs.3,000 for individuals and Rs.6,000 for Hindu Undivided Families. I propose,
however, to couple this with an increased allowance for married people. The extra
tax-free slab of Rs.1,000 which at present applied to married people will now be
raised to Rs.2,000. The wider coverage of income-tax consequent on this set of proposals
will bring in about Rs.5 crores this year.
 53. My next proposal relates to the taxation of Companies. I propose to raise
the income-tax payable by Companies from the present level of 4 annas in the rupee
to 30 per cent and the Corporation Tax from the present level of 2 annas 9 pies in the
rupee to 20 per cent. As Hon. Members are aware, shareholders of Companies are
entitled to credit of income-tax paid on their behalf by the Company. The net effect of
the proposal to increase income-tax on Companies will, therefore, not be very
significant. It will to some extent help us to cheek tax evasion.
 The need for corporate savings is as great as ever. In view, however, of the
increase proposed by me in the rate of Corporation Tax, I propose to reduce the
Excess Dividends Tax -
 to 10 per cent on distribution of dividends between 6 per cent and 10 per cent
of the paid-up capital,

 17

 to 20 per cent on distribution between 10 per cent and 18 per cent of the paid-
up capital, and
 to 30 per cent on the balance.
 During the debate on the Finance (No.3) Bill introduced by me last December,
reference was made by certain Members to the stimulus that my proposals were likely
to give to bonus share issues. I was aware then that with the increase in the rates of
Excess Dividends Tax and the introduction of the Capital Gains Tax, there should be
some change in the rates of tax on bonus issues. I have considered this matter and
propose to raise the tax thereon from the present level of 121/2 per cent to 30 per cent.
 54. At present, rates of super-tax for inter-corporate dividends are about 17
percent for Indian Companies and 20 per cent for foreign companies. With increase in
the basic rates of Corporation Tax, these rates require adjustment. I propose accordingly,
to reduce the rate of inter-corporate super-tax to 10 per cent for both Indian and
foreign companies on dividends received from Indian subsidiaries. The effect of this
will be that, so far as foreign companies working through subsidiaries are concerned,
the total tax payable by them will remain practically unaltered. Similarly, for foreign
companies operating through branches and earning other incomes, the rate of
Corporation Tax will be reduced from 36 per cent to 30 per cent. I expect that, with
these changes, there will be some encouragement to the investment of foreign capital
in India.
 55. My next proposal with regard to Companies relates to the tax on
undistributed profits of companies in which the public are not substantially interested.
This tax has frequently been the subject matter of considerable argument. The principle
on which the tax is based is unexceptionable, namely, that individuals having income
in the higher brackets should not be allowed to avoid payment of super-tax by forming
close corporations and not distributing their profits in such corporations. However, in
the context of our development plans, we have to balance against the need to prevent
super-tax avoidance the needs of companies for funds required for expanding industrial
activities. I propose to reduce to 45 per cent the minimum percentage of available
profits which an industrial company of the above type should distribute in order to
avoid the penal consequences of inadequate distribution; for non-industrial companies
the percentage will continue to be retained at 60 per cent. For a company which
derives profits partly from industrial activities and partly from other activities, the
minimum distribution required will be 45 per cent of available industrial profits and
60 per cent of other available profits. Investment companies will be required to distribute
100 per cent as usual. In cases where the accumulated profits and reserves are not less
than the paid-up capital or the value of the fixed assets, the minimum percentage
required to be distributed is at present 100 per cent for all companies. I propose to
reduce the percentage to 45 per cent for the industrial companies and 90 per cent for
others. With these reductions in the minimum amount required to be distributed, it
 18

will be unnecessary to continue the present scheme of adjudication by the
Commissioner of income Tax and the Board of Referees on the business needs of
companies seeking total or partial exemption from the operation of the provisions
relating to minimum distribution.
 56. There are certain other minor changes proposed upon which I do not wish
to dilate here. These relate to exemption from income-tax of employers’ contribution
to a recognised provident fund, increase in the percentage of the income that will
qualify for rebate of income-tax If saved in the provident fund or insurance, limitation
on the carry-forward of losses etc. I have also taken the opportunity of redrafting the
provision relating to deposits to be made by companies of a portion of their undistributed
profits and development rebate and depreciation allowances so as to bring out the
Government’s intention more clearly.
 57. Altogether, the changes I propose in the taxation of Companies will bring
in additional receipts amounting to Rs.71/2 crores.
 58. I come now to two new tax measures designed to alter the tax structure in
a way that will ensure a more effective and at the same time a more equitable basis for
taxation. My first proposal is to levy a Tax on Wealth. It is recognised that income as
defined by existing income Tax laws and practice is not a sufficient measure of tax
paying capacity and that the system of taxation on incomes has to be supplemented by
taxation based on wealth. This is more equitable and it also promises, over a period,
to reduce the possibilities of tax evasion. I mentioned earlier the reliefs in income-tax
at top levels of income which I am introducing this year. These reliefs are meant as an
encouragement to larger effort and greater initiative on the basis of which alone a
healthy and progressive economy can be built up. It is necessary at the same time to
adopt other measures which are egalitarian in intent but which do not have a disincentive
effect. The Tax on Wealth that I am now proposing is one such measure. This tax will
be payable by individuals, Hindu Undivided Families and companies. In the case of
individuals, values up to Rs.2 lakhs and in the case of Hindu Undivided Families
values up to Rs.3 lakhs will be exempted. In respect of wealth exceeding that amount
the rate will be 1/2 per cent for the first Rs.10 lakhs, 1 per cent for the next 10 lakhs
and 11/2 per cent on the balance. This will thus be a progressive tax which, together
with the surcharges I have recommended in respect of income-tax on unearned incomes,
will contribute towards a more effective taxation of the richer classes without
diminishing incentives to earn in the process.
 59. In the case of Companies, there will be no tax on assets up to a value of
Rs.5 lakhs; on values beyond that the rate will be 1/2 per cent. The Wealth Tax is
intended primarily as a measure of personal taxation but in the peculiar economic
structure of India I consider it advisable not to exclude Companies from the purview
of this tax. However, the rate of tax has to be low. This is why I have proposed a flat
rate of only 1/2 per cent on assets above the exemption limit I have just mentioned.

 19

 60. Certain properties will be exempted from this tax., Some of these are:-
 Agricultural properties;
 Properties belonging to charitable or religious trusts;
 Works of art;
 Archaeological collections not intended for sale;
 Balances in recognised provident funds and insurance policies;
 Personal effects including furniture, care, jewellery, etc., up to a maximum of
Rs. 25,000; and Books and publications not intended for sale.
 With a view to achieving simplicity in the procedure for evaluating the various
kinds of assets which form part of a business undertaking, it is proposed as far as
possible to treat the business undertaking as a whole as a single unit for valuation.
Other assets will be taken at their market value. The yield from this tax is estimated
at about Rs.15 crores.
 The imposition of this tax as also the other measures now proposed should help
in checking evasion. I am taking credit of Rs.5 crores on this account.
 61. Broadly speaking, the administrative set-up and the procedure for
assessment and appeal will be the same as for income-tax. With regard to valuation of
immovable non-agricultural property, the assessee will be given a right of reference to
an arbitration committee against the decision of the first appellate authority. This
committee will consist of a valuer appointed under the Estate, Duty Act and another
non-official member drawn from a panel of persons familiar wit) local property values.
 62. The other proposal I make is the introduction of a Tax on Expenditure.
This is a form of taxation which has no backing as yet of historical experience. It is
however, a tax which. given effective administrative arrangements, can be a potent
instrument for restraining ostentatious expenditure and for promoting savings. In the
present circumstances, I think all we can do is to make a small beginning. I propose
to levy this tax only on individuals and Hindu Undivided Families whose income for
income tax purposes is not less than Rs.60,000 a year. The tax will be imposed on all
expenditure incurred, from whatever source it may be, in excess of certain sums which
will vary with the size of the family. The amounts excluded are:-
 A basic amount of Rs. 24,000 for an assessee and his wife; and Rs. 5,000 for
each dependent child.
 The rate of tax will be based on a slab system, the rate for each slab increasing
progressively with the increase in the level of expenditure. Thus, for excess expenditure
up to Rs.10,000 the rate will be 10 per cent and for higher slabs the rate will increase
progressively. As in the case of Wealth Tax, the administrative set-up and the assessment
 20

and appellate procedure will be the same as for Income-Tax. I propose to make this
tax applicable from the financial year 1958-59 and therefore take no credit for any
receipts in 1957-58.
 63. I propose to levy a tax on railway passenger fares. The rate of tax will be
5 per cent for distances up to 30 miles, 15 per cent for distances between 31 miles and
500 miles and 10 per cent for longer distances. No tax will be levied on season tickets.
The yield of this tax is expected to be Rs.14 crores in a whole year. In the current year,
the yield will be about Rs.8 crores. The proceeds of it less the amount attributable to
Union Territories will have to be distributed entirely to the States. The States need
more resources and railway travellers, like consumers of other commodities, should,
under present conditions, make a contribution. I propose to seek the advice of the
Finance Commission before I bring forward proposals before Parliament in regard to
the actual distribution of the proceeds of this tax.
CHANGES IN POSTAL RATES
 64. The Postal and Telegraph Branches of the Posts and Telegraphs Department
are working at a loss. Except for unregistered letters and inland letter cards practically
all items of postal traffic are carried at a loss. On a number of items like post cards,
money orders, registered newspapers etc. the rates charged have, for many years, been
substantially less than the cost of providing the service. For example, it has been
estimated that the average cost of carrying a post card is 7.24 naye paise as against the
present postage of 5 naye paise. This results in an annual loss of over Rs.155 lakhs.
Every increase in traffic in these items- and traffic has been increasing- results in an
increase in the losses. With the progressively increasing expenditure on construction
of staff quarters and the provision of other amenities for the staff, the existing postal
rates are bound to prove even more uneconomic. The opening of unremunerative Post
Offices and Telegraph Offices as part of the Department’s expansion schemes under
the first and second five year plans has contributed to the loss in the Postal and
Telegraph Branches. The Department has also been building up its capital assets at a
fairly rapid rate, the total capital outlay at present being about three times what it was
before independence. The annual provision, from revenue, for depreciation and
replacement of these assets, as I have said before, is at present only Rs.1.25 crores,
and it has been decided to increase this provision to Rs.2.50 crores during the current
year in anticipation of a detailed examination of the whole question. In response to a
demand which had been widely and persistently voiced by the book trade, both in and
out of Parliament, Government had appointed a Committee to examine the question of
charging a concessional rate of postage on bonafide books as compared with other
items chargeable as packets so that the cost of sending books to rural areas which
could be reached only through Post Offices might not be unduly increased. After
considering the Book Committee’s Report, it has been decided to allow a concessional
rate of postage on books. All these measures, however, inevitably result in reducing
the surplus earnings of the Department and of increasing the losses of the Postal and
 21

Telegraph Branches. To ensure the financial stability of the Department, it has become
necessary to raise some rates. On post cards, the existing rates of 5 naye paise for
single and 10 naye paise for the reply post cards will be raised to 6 naye paise and 12
naye paise respectively. Postage on local, post cards will be raised similarly from 3
naye paise for single and 6 naye paise for reply post cards to 4 naye paise and 8 naye
paise respectively. For packets containing bonafide books only, the postage on the
initial weight slab of 5 tolas will be reduced from the existing rate of 6 naye paise to
5 naye paise but on other packets the existing rate of 6 naye paise will be raised to 8
naye paise. The postage on additional weight slabs, in both these cases, will remain
unchanged. In spite of these adjustments in the book, sample and pattern packet rates,
the traffic in this category of articles will continue to result in a loss of over Rs.8 lakhs
per annum. The rates on parcels will be increased from the existing level of 50 naye
paise for every 40 tolas or fraction thereof to 60 naye paise for the 1st 40 tolas or
fraction thereof and 50 naye paise for every additional 40 tolas or fraction thereof. On
inland telegrams, the charge for every additional word over the minimum of 8 words
will be raised from 7 naye paise to 8 naye paise for ordinary and from 14 naye paise
to 16 naye paise for express telegrams. The additional revenue expected in the current
year from these increases is Rs.85 lakhs.
RECAPITULATION
 65. I must now recapitualate briefly the proposals I have made so far:-
 (i) Firstly, my proposals involve small increases of import duties on a number
 of articles, the additional yield from which during the year is estimated at
 about Rs.6 crores.
 (ii) Secondly, the proposals I have made in respect of excise duties involve an
 enhancement of the rates of duty on various items such as motor-spirit,
 refined diesel oils and vaporising oil, diesel oil not otherwise specified,
 steel ingots, cement, sugar, matches, unmanufactured tobacco other than
 flue cured, vegetable non-essential oils, and paper. The additional revenues
 on this account are estimated at Rs.53.20 crores for the remaining portion
 of the current financial year but Rs.4.2 crores will be payable to the States
 as their share of the additional duties on tobacco and matches.
 (iii) Thirdly, the proposals I have made in regard to personal income-tax and
 super-tax are estimated to bring in Rs.25 crores in the current year of
 which the share of the States on account of income-tax will come to Rs.3
 crores. The reduction in incomer-tax and super-tax rates involve a loss of
 Rs.7.5 crores. The lowering of the exemption limit is estimated to yield
 Rs.5 crores. The adjustments in Company taxation will yield about
 Rs.7.5crores. The Tax on Wealth is estimated to yield Rs.15 crores, and to
 this I add Rs.5 crores by way of better collections of income-tax reflecting
 a reduction of tax evasion. The changes I have suggested in direct taxation
 22

 do not make a big addition to public revenues this year but I expect that
 they will make an increasing contribution to the Exchequer as we get
 more experience with the new forms of taxation I have proposed and as
 the machinery for assessment and collection gets geared to its new tasks.
 (iv) Fourthly, I have proposed a tax on fares payable by passengers travelling
 by Railway. This will yield Rs.8 crores which will be distributed entirely
 to the States.
 (v) Fifthly, I have proposed changes in postal and telegram rates which are
 expected to yield a revenue of Rs.85 lakhs.
 (vi) Sixthly, I have proposed an Expenditure Tax which will be effective from
 1958-59 but will apply to expenditures incurred in 1957-58.
 66. The net accretion to the Central revenues as a result of these proposals
will amount to Rs.77.85 crores and the revenue budget will now show a surplus of
Rs.44.73 crores. Ordinarily the over-all deficit would, as a consequence, amount to
Rs.290 crores, if the additional revenue of Rs.15 crores which would be passed on to
the States as a result of these proposals is not taken into account. As Hon. Members
will observe from the White Paper, Central assistance to the States for financing the
Plan during 1957-58 has been placed at Rs.278 crores. As a result of the additional
revenue accruing to the States, there will therefore be a corresponding reduction in
this figure, the reduction being taken in the provision for loans to the State Governments.
The overall deficit will thus amount to Rs.275 crores and will be met by expansion of
Treasury Bills.
TAXATION AND DEVELOPMENT
 67. I would like to say a few words about the import of these proposals. We
are pledged to move in the direction of a socialist society. This means that we wish
to develop an efficient system of production and an equitable pattern of income and
wealth which will ensure well balanced progress. Such a system requires a
strengthening of incentives to work and to save. This is the rationale of my tax
concessions in earned incomes. A standard rate of tax on earned incomes, and a
differential rate for taxation of unearned incomes, coupled with a tax on wealth and
a tax on expenditure, will give us a better basis for assessment of tax liability,
especially in respect of higher income ranges, and will help us to close progressively
the loop-holes for tax evasion and corrosion of the tax base. If I have brought down
the exemption limit for tax liability it is, firstly, because the present limit is too high
in relation to the average, level of incomes in the country, and secondly, because I
am of the view that the ground must be prepared from now on for bringing into tax
net the increases in incomes which will take place in these ranges in the coming
years. All my proposals in the field of direct taxation form an inter-related whole,
and should, I suggest be judged as such.

 23

 68. My proposals in respect of company taxation are designed not merely to
increase revenues but also on balance, to encourage the ploughing back of profits
through a cheek on dividend distribution. These measures are not intended to curtail
genuine investment in the private sector, though it would not be unreasonable to
assume that a slight slowing down for a short period will not, in present circumstances
be undesirable. There are, however, other devices to regulate private investment. I
wish, therefore, to retain the bias in the tax structure in favour of corporate investment.
It is for this reason that I have left untouched the existing liberal depreciation allowances
and the system of development rebates, which it is recognised on all hand, are a
powerful incentive for investment. I have also as I mentioned earlier, re-adjusted the
tax rates to encourage foreign investment. I recognise that the shareholder or the
investor expects to get a reasonable return on his capital, but I also think that under
modern conditions there is even greater need for providing incentives for those who
work and manage concerns and thus fall within the category of earned income earners.
 69. My proposals involve a raising of burdens on the near necessities of the
common man. This is inevitable in the present circumstances, These burdens, large as
they may look in the aggregate, have a low average incidence. A process of development
in a country where most incomes are low cannot be financed without calling for
sacrifices from all sections of the community, and there are special reasons at this
juncture for applying some restraint on consumption in order to cheek inflationary
pressures and to stimulate exports. I recognise, at the same time, the need in particular
sectors may well be from time to time to assist in maintaining consumption at a
reasonable level in terms of the minimum nutritional standards, and to this end, it may
be necessary to subsidise food. My intention, therefore, is to build up from out of the
additional receipts of taxation a food subsidy fund of the order of Rs.25 crores. This
fund will be used to keep down food prices, particularly for the mere vulnerable areas
and would I think prove a valuable instrument in the hands of my Honourable colleague,
the Food and Agriculture Minister.
 70. The proposals that I have made will still leave the overall deficit for the
year at a level somewhat higher than I would consider safe; but it is not unwise in my
judgement to run a measure of risk especially If by doing so the expansionary impulse
in the economy can be maintained at a reasonably high level. A budgetary deficit
involves creation of fresh purchasing power in to the hands of the public than it
withdraws from it. The stresses and strains that have developed in the economy are a
warning against unrestricted deficit financing. I am not against deficit financing as
such; I recognise it can play a role in promoting development. But it is a medicine to
be taken in small closes; it is not food that would sustain the system. On the whole, I
doubt If we shall be able over the Plan period to undertake deficit financing of the
order indicated in the Plan, and this means we have to raise more resources by taxation,
loans and small savings. Considering the needs not only of the current year but also of
the next few years in terms of the second five year Plan, I am convinced that the
measures I have placed before the House today are essential and salutary.
 24

 71. Indeed, I feel confident that over a period, they will help us in getting out
of the stagnancy of public revenue relatively to national income, which is a bottleneck
from the point of view of further developmental planning. The ratio of public revenues
to taxation in India is low, even by the standards of relatively under-developed countries.
The way to raise it is to initiate structural changes in the tax system so as to make it
more progressive in terms of returns. The emphasis of my proposals is on this aspect
of the tax problem. The propriety of the changes I have suggested should be judged in
this light rather than in terms of their immediate yield. I have in effect, outlined the
tax structure for the Plan period. There will, undoubtedly, have to be some adjustments
in this structure from year to year, but I expect that these adjustments will be relatively
small, and of a marginal character. For the rest of the Plan period, our aim will be to
watch how the changes I have initiated this year work in practice and how the system
can be improved upon-to the benefit of the tax payer no less than in the interest of the
tax-receiver. Within this broad framework, I believe, all concerned can proceed with
their plans with confidence and assurance of sympathetic consideration by Government
of any genuine difficulties.
CONCLUSION
 72. This brings me to the end of my story; I am aware that the policies and
proposals I have placed before you add up to a varied and somewhat formidable bill
of fare. But the exigencies of the situation demand nothing less. There are moments in
the history of every nation when it must advance on a great many fronts at the same
time. The task before us is not merely one of raising resources for the immediate
needs of the Plan. We have also to attempt at the same time a rationalisation of the tax
structure so that it can sustain a mounting crescendo of developmental effort in CW
years to come. I am one of those who also believe that the greatest advances towards
economic equality and positive social improvement are made in difficult times when
the conscience and the solidarity of a people are raised to the highest pitch. This I
believe is one of the chief lessons of the second world war. Sacrifice on a nation-wide
scale and injustice or excessive inequality go ill together. And that is why I have
endeavoured in the present budget to snatch from the needs of the moment an
opportunity for imparting a new turn to our tax structure towards greater efficiency
and I hope greater equity. A heavy responsibility rests on us all at this juncture, and I
have presented to the House an approach in terms of policies and of proposals which
is to the best of my judgement appropriate to this responsibility. I hope when the time
comes for someone to judge whether we rose to the occasion or not, we shall have to
our credit a record worthy of this House and of the nation.
 (May 15, 1957)




 25

