 PART B
 69. In the 1985-86 Budget, we initiated a process of major tax reform. The
broad direction and strategy for this reform was set out in the Long Term Fiscal Policy
(LTFP). We will be introducing a detailed Amendment Bill on Direct Taxes separately
in the Budget Session. This Bill will implement wide ranging changes aimed at
simplification and rationalisation.
 11

 70. The basic thrust of my few Direct Tax proposals is to provide incentives
for savings to promote investment and to support housing. I propose to strengthen
some welfare measures. I have also included some measures to enhance revenue.
 71. I do not propose any changes in the rate structure for Personal and
Corporate Taxes. This is in line with the Long Term Fiscal Policy.
 72. In order to conserve foreign exchange and to raise revenue, I propose to
levy a modest tax of 15% on foreign exchange released in India for foreign travel.
Foreign exchange released for medical treatment and education abroad will be excluded.
This tax will be applicable for travel from a date to be notified. The revenue yield
from this measure is expected to be Rs. 60 crores.
 73. Those who can afford to patronize high class hotels should also be afforded
the further pleasure of contributing to the national exchequer. A separate legislation
will be brought forward for levy of a tax on expenditure in expensive hotels. This tax,
to be levied at 10% of expenditure, will not apply to payments made in foreign
exchange. It will become effective after passage of the necessary legislation.
 74. I have already mentioned the decision to introduce a new National Savings
Scheme based on net savings. Necessary legislative changes are being included in the
Finance Bill.
 75. I propose to provide a fiscal incentive for channelising savings into the
housing sector. Repayment of loans and payments made to the extent of Rs.10,000 in
a year towards the cost of any new residential property will qualify for deduction on
the same lines as life insurance premia or contribution to provident fund under Section
80C of the Income-tax Act. This exemption will be within the existing limit of
Rs.40,000.
 76. Capital gains arising from the sale of a residential house are exempted in
case such gains are utilised for acquiring another house. This was hitherto applicable
only to individuals. It is now being extended to Hindu Undivided Families.
 77. I understand that for the purpose of taxation of income from houses, our
tax laws make a distinction between a real owner who is not a legal owner and a legal
owner who is not a real owner. Following the well-established revenue tradition,
when it comes to taxing, we tax both the real owner who is not a legal owner and the
legal owner who is not a real owner. Concessions available to a house owner are,
however, given only to a real owner who is also a legal owner. I propose to simplify
the law by clarifying that the real owner, even if he is not the legal owner, will pay
the tax and avail of the concessions available to the legal owner. I hope this proposal
is abundantly clear to the Hon’ble Members.
 78. In cases where the compensation for acquisition of a property is enhanced,
or where a new residential house is not acquired within the specified time after selling
 12

the old house, the completed tax cases for the past years have to be modified to tax the
capital gains accrued earlier. Certain procedural changes are being made in the law to
remove this complication.
 79. Several important changes have been introduced in the corporate tax
structure in the last two years. With effect from April, 1987, a liberalised set of
depreciation rules is being introduced. Depreciation will be allowed in respect of
blocks of assets instead of the present system linked to individual assets. There will
be only three rates of depreciation for plant and machinery, namely, 100%, 50% and
33-1/3%. Apart from simplifying assessment, this will enable industry to replace and
modernise capital equipment faster.
 80. It is only fair and proper that the prosperous should pay at least some tax.
The phenomenon of so-called “zero-tax” highly profitable companies deserves attention.
In 1983, a new Section 80VVA was inserted in the Act so that all profitable companies
pay some tax. This does not seem to have helped and is being withdrawn. I now
propose to introduce a provision whereby every company will have to pay a “minimum
corporate tax” on the profits declared by it in its own accounts. Under this new
provision, a company will pay tax on at least 30% of its book profit. In other words,
a domestic widely held company will pay tax of at least 15% of its book profit. This
measure will yield a revenue gain of approximately Rs.75 crores.
 81. The capital markets have shown remarkable buoyancy. I propose to make
some changes in the Tax Laws which will support healthy development of the capital
markets. The existing provision of allowing deduction in respect of investment in
equity shares of certain categories of new companies was to be withdrawn with effect
from 1st April, 1987. In view of the need to continue support for issues of new
companies, I propose to extend this concession for 3 more years. I also propose to
reduce the holding period of these shares from 5 years to 3 years.
 82. At present shares have to be held for a period of 36 months before capital
gains on their transfer qualify for the concessional treatment allowed for long term
capital gains. It is proposed to reduce the holding period to 12 months. This will
provide greater flexibility to investors and also improve the mobility of capital invested
in shares.
 83. Concentration of industries in many of our urban areas poses serious
problems of congestion, pollution and hazards. In order to encourage industries to
shift out of such areas, I propose to exempt capital gains made on the sale of land and
buildings in such areas provided these are reinvested in approved relocation schemes.
 84. The provisions regarding additional income-tax on undistributed profits
of closely held companies have lost their relevance after the reduction in tax rates
effected in 1985-86 Budget. These are being deleted. Because of some court decisions,
the capital gains on transfer of goodwill of a concern or transfer of assets from a firm
to a partner and vice-versa escape the tax net. Such gains will be explicitly taxable.
 13

 85. A tax holiday to newly established undertakings in Free Trade Zones has
been provided. It is being clarified that this will also extend to units which develop
software as also those which assemble or process components for exports.
 86. A tax concession is available to the Indian companies earning income
from a foreign Government or a foreign enterprise for imparting technical knowhow.
This tax concession will now be available only if the foreign exchange earned is
repatriated to India. It is also being clarified that an Indian resident cannot be treated
as a foreign enterprise for this purpose.
 87. It is proposed to exclude computers and machines for transmission and
reception of messages from the list given in the Eleventh Schedule of the Income-tax
Act as these industries are no longer non-priority.
 88. At present Indian citizens earning remuneration in foreign currency for
services rendered abroad are allowed 50% exemption under Section 80 RRA of the
Income-tax Act subject to certain conditions. This is being further liberalised. The
exemption will now be allowed to the extent of 50% of the remuneration, or 75% of
the remuneration repatriated in convertible foreign exchange, whichever is higher.
 89. In order to improve coverage and prevent tax evasion, it is proposed that
tax at specified rates should be deducted at source in respect of all payments beyond
certain prescribed amounts of fees for professional and technical services, royalty,
rent, commission or brokerage and payments for goods supplied to Government, etc.
This will apply to payments made by all persons, excepting individuals and Hindu
Undivided Families.
 90. Let me now come to measures for the welfare of workers, members of
armed forces and the handicapped. There are a number of cases where the employers
do not credit their own contributions nor those of the employees to the Provident
Fund and the State Insurance Fund. It is also unfortunate that a separate fund is not
being kept by some employers in respect of gratuity of workers. To prevent this anti-
labour practice, we propose to penalise such delinquent employers by providing that
the contributions of the employees to these funds will be taxed as the income of the
employer and allowed as a deduction only when they are made over to the separate
accounts relating to these funds within the time allowed under the statute.
 91. Any compensation received by a workman at the time of his retrenchment
is exempt from tax. Similar exemption is being extended to payments made under
voluntary retirement schemes for public sector employees.
 92. Regimental Funds or Non-public Funds are utilised for purposes such as
providing assistance to widows of armed personnel killed in action, as also to disabled
soldiers. The contributions will enjoy similar tax concessions as other funds of national
importance like the National Defence Fund.
 14

 93. I am increasing the special deduction allowed to the physically
handicapped persons and the totally blind from Rs.10,000 to Rs.15,000.
 94. There are other procedural proposals in the area of Direct Taxes including
those to ensure better functioning of the Settlement Commission which are in the Bill.
 95. For the Members of Parliament, I propose to introduce a general
exemption in respect of Constituency Allowance without reference to any monetary
ceiling.
 96. The above proposals will give a net revenue gain of Rs.145 crores.
 97. Let me now turn to Indirect Taxes. The tariff regime for capital goods
will be restructured and rationalised. I propose to extend MODVAT to most of the
remaining areas. Excise and Customs duties for certain industries are being adjusted
to stimulate growth. There is a package of reliefs for the common man.
 98. As I mentioned earlier, the capital goods industry needs special support.
 99. At present, there are two tariff rates for import of machinery: 101% for
import of general machinery and a concessional rate of 55% when machinery is
imported for a new project. The low duty rates for project imports have provided a
strong encouragement for unnecessary imports. The differential between the general
rate and the project rate also discriminates against modernisation of existing units,
and favours sickness. These anomalies must be corrected.
 100. I propose to equalise the two rates at 85%. The rate of duty applicable for
components will be 15% below the applicable tariff rate.
 101. At present, fertilizers, power and electronics are allowed concessional
import duty on their capital goods imports. These rates are being adjusted upwards.
The duty on import of equipment for the electronics industry is being raised from 25%
to 30% and for fertilizer plants, it is being increased from zero percent to 15%. In the
case of power, plants of above 50 MW capacity will continue to be imported at 25%.
Plants of 50 MW and below will pay a higher duty of 35%.
 102. Further concessions are needed to encourage upgradation of technology
in specified capital goods sectors.
 (i) At present, domestic capital goods manufacturers have to pay very high
 import duties on import of special steels. The duty rate is being reduced
 to 85% on steels such as boilers-pressure-vessels-quality plates, sheets or
 coils, turbine blade flats and stainless steel plates.
 (ii) The textile machinery industry will be allowed supply of imported stainless
 steel at concessional duty of 65% instead of the prescribed rate of 245%
 at present.
 15

 (iii) In order to encourage modernisation of foundries, import duty on specified
 capital goods is being reduced from 101% to 55%.
 (iv) Caustic soda plants presently based on mercury-cell technology should be
 encouraged to convert into membrane-cell technology. The new technology
 saves energy and reduces pollution. Specified equipment required for
 this conversion will be allowed imports at concessional duty of 35% instead
 of the present 101%.
 103. The MODVAT introduced in the 1986-87 Budget was a major innovation.
We covered 38 chapters of the Excise Tariff last year. I now propose to extend
MODVAT to all the remaining chapters except those relating to textiles, tobacco and
the petroleum sectors. MODVAT will now be extended to cover food products, mineral
products, leather and travel goods, footwear, paper and paper-board, wood and cork
products, asbestos cement products and precious metals.
 104. Last year, in order to ensure revenue neutrality, the introduction of
MODVAT was accompanied by an increase in the duty on the final product to balance
the set-off being given of the duty paid on inputs. This year, keeping in view the
nature of products, the duty on the final product is not being increased except in a few
items. This will reduce the effective duty on a large number of items.
 105. In the case of food products, for example, the total number of items
coverd by MODVAT will be over 100. The duty increase for revenue neutrality is
being done only in case of cheese, malt preparations and aerated soft drink. The
effective rate of taxation on other food products, such as biscuits, skimmed milk
powder, butter, jams and jellies, and confectionery will be significantly reduced.
Farmers and horticulturists are benefited by the expansion of the market of value-
added food products.
 106. Some increase in the final duty is necessary in five of the items which
were covered last year where we have found that set-off given last year was very
much larger than initially estimated. These are zinc-oxide, adhesives based on synthetic
resin, organic surface-active agents, electric motors and primary batteries.
 107. A number of important procedural changes are also being introduced to
simplify the operation of MODVAT. Some of the concessions are:
 (1) Refund in cash of input duty credit if the final product is exported by the
 manufacturer in certain circumstances.
 (2) Availability of credit of duties in respect of inputs lying in stock.
 (3) Adjustment of input duty credit if additional duty is demanded from input
 manufacturers in case of change in classification of inputs.
 (4) Receipt of inputs directly by the job-workers will be permitted for all
 items under the MODVAT scheme.
 16

 108. With these measures, we will have successfully eliminated the cascading
effect of excise duty and given a measure of excise relief.
 109. Our comprehensive policy package has made electronics one of the fastest-
growing industries. It has generated substantial employment. I propose to make
certain changes which will strengthen the basic design of the existing policy.
 110. For computers, the following reliefs and rationalisations are being carried
out:-
 (i) Import duty on electronic sub-assemblies is being reduced from 308% to
 150%.
 (ii) The list of peripherals is being enlarged and a uniform rate of import duty
 of 60% is being specified.
 (iii) Import duty on specified data-communication equipment is being reduced
 from 140% to 100%. Duty on mechanical parts of data-communication
 equipment is being reduced from 140% to 55%.
 (iv) The present notification regarding exemption of import duty on computer
 peripherals for Research Institutes is being extended by 3 years.
 (v) Duty on computer systems imported under OGL is being reduced from
 150% to 140% (basic and auxiliary).
 (vi) Import duty on specified electronic parts of computers is being increased
 from 25% to 75% in order to give appropriate protection for indigenous
 production. The import duty on mechanical parts of computer peripherals
 is also being increased from 5% to 75%; and this is being extended to
 mechanical parts of CNC system.
 111. The Indian computer industry achieved a turnover of Rs.225 crores last
year. It has passed its infancy and is healthy and vigorous. Now that the industry has
arrived, can the tax- collector be far behind? It is proposed to levy an excise duty of
10% on computers and peripherals. With MODVAT, the effective incidence of duty
will be much lower.
 112. The research and development base of the electronics industry is crucial
for its long-term success. I, therefore, propose to reduce the duty on specified
equipments required for R&D from 140% to 55%.
 113. We must also encourage domestic production of capital goods required
for the electronics industry. At present, mechanical components required for
manufacture of such capital goods attract a duty of 140%. I propose to reduce this
duty to 45% in the case of components required for nearly 300 specified machines.
 17

 114. In the field of general electronics, a concessional duty structure of 30%,
45% and 75% is allowed for imports of raw materials, piece-parts and components,
respectively. We are expanding the coverage of this concessional duty structure by
adding some more items.
 115. I propose to abolish the excise duty on the production of poly-silicon in
all forms as a measure of support for the domestic industry. The customs duty for the
import of silicon, solar cells and photo-voltaic systems is being fixed at 30%, 45%
and 75%, respectively. I propose to increase the duty on the import of poly-silicon to
75% for electronics industry in the interest of domestic production.
 116. Production of television sets has increased rapidly in line with targets. A
thriving and competitive industry has been set up. I propose to make two changes:
 (i) As an anti-avoidance measure, it is proposed to impose an excise duty or
 countervailing duty of Rs.150 on black and white tubes meant for sets of
 size above 36 cms. and to impose an excise duty or countervailing duty of
 Rs.600 on all colour television tubes. Under MODVAT, this input duty
 would be fully rebated to duty-paying manufacturers with no additional
 duty burden on the consumer. It will, however, help to check unlicensed
 production.
 (ii) The excise duty on colour television sets exceeding 36 cms. size is
 presently Rs.1,500 irrespective of the value of the set. I propose to increase
 the duty on costlier sets to Rs.1,750 per set. This will apply to sets
 cleared at assessable value higher than Rs.5,000 which corresponds to a
 retail price of about Rs.7,500. The excise duty for sets cleared at assessable
 value of Rs.5,000 or below will remain at Rs.1,500. The costlier sets can
 bear the extra duty.
 117. These proposals relating to the electronics industry will involve a net
loss of revenue of Rs.19.30 crores. There will be a revenue gain of Rs.40 crores in
excise duty and a loss of Rs.59.30 crores in customs duty.
 118. Important developments have taken place in the automobile industry in
the past few years. New technology has been introduced, production has increased
and indigenisation is taking place. Government have been reviewing these and other
developments and will be announcing a comprehensive policy. For the present, I
have the following tax proposals for automobiles:
 (i) At present, a concessional rate of customs duty of 50% is allowed for
 imported sub-components required for the manufacture of components
 for fuel-efficient trucks, cars, and two-wheelers. I propose to enlarge the
 list of components eligible for concessional import of sub-components.
 This will encourage indigenisation.
 18

 (ii) Excise duty on fuel-efficient motor vehicles with engine capacity not
 exceeding 1000 c.c. is proposed to be increased from 20% to 25%. This
 sector can bear the additional duty and it will still benefit from a lower
 rate than the rest of the industry.
 (iii) For handicapped individuals, I propose to provide for total exemption
 from customs duty in respect of automatic transmission and other special
 equipment to be fitted into fuel-efficient cars of engine capacity not
 exceeding 1000 c.c.
 (iv) The rate of duty on import of spares for meeting the after-sales or warranty
 of fuel-efficient motor vehicles is being increased from 50% to 75%.
 (v) Excise duty on tractors will now be fixed on engine capacity instead of
 Power-Take-off-Horse-Power . This is an anti-avoidance measure with
 no revenue implication.
 119. Plastics are widely used by the common man. They also have a tremendous
potential for use in farms and factories. Our plastic prices are high. Government
propose to initiate measures to reduce costs in this important area.
 120. I propose to reduce the basic customs duty on PVC resin (general-purpose
suspension-grade) from Rs.10,500 per metric tonne to Rs.7,500 per metric tonne.
These resins are used in the manufacture of cheap footwear, pipes for agricultural
application and as insulation for wires and cables.
 121. I also propose to reduce the basic customs duty on Low- Density -
Polyethylene (LDPE) from 100% to 75%. LDPE is used as a base for production of
a wide range of packaging materials. LDPE film has a big potential use in the lining
of canals and farms and field-channels.
 122. The excise duty on products of regenerated cellulose, which includes the
cheap packaging material-cellophane, is being reduced from 40% to 20%. Excise
duty is being similarly reduced on cellulose acetate moulding granules which is used
for spectacle-frames, umbrella handles, tooth-brushes and on sodium carboxy-methyl
cellulose which is used in oil-drilling, textiles processing and detergents.
 123. Excise duty on certain varieties of industrial plastics i.e., acrylic and vinyl
resin emulsions is being reduced from 40% to 20%.
 124. Over the past year, we have taken a number of steps to strengthen our
export performance through fiscal and other means. I propose to give the following
additional incentives.
 (a) For the gem and jewellery industry, customs duty on 46 additional items
 of tools, machinery, etc. is being reduced to 35%.
 19

 (b) For the marine products industry , 3 additional items will be allowed
 concessional import duty of 40% (basic and auxiliary).
 (c) For the leather industry -
 (i) 31 additional items of machinery required for leather industry will
 be allowed concessional duty of 35%.
 (ii) polyurethane film/foil used for improving finished leather will have
 lower countervailing duty of 40%.
 (iii) polyurethane leather required for the manufacture of football for
 exports will be exempted from duty.
 (d) The import duty on tyre moulds required for export production is being
 reduced to 25%.
 (e) Export duty on mica products is being abolished except for mica waste
 and scrap.
 (f) Import duty on flax and ramie fibres is being reduced from 80% to 40%.
 125. I also propose to make some adjustments which will further benefit the
common man:-
 (1) In August 1985, Government introduced a scheme of fiscal relief for the
 manufacture of inexpensive blended fabrics -Sulabh fabrics. Under this
 scheme, NTC mills are supplied raw material free of excise duty for the
 manufacture of suitings of value upto Rs.45 per metre and shirting of
 value upto Rs.20 per metre. This scheme has made a good start. It is now
 proposed to have a similar scheme for manufacture of Sulabh sarees.
 This will make available good-quality sarees at reasonable prices.
 (2) At present, footwear of Rs. 45 per pair is exempt from excise duty. I
 propose to raise the limit to Rs.60 per pair of assessable value which
 corresponds to footwear retailing at about Rs.100 per pair. To off-set the
 revenue loss, excise on footwear exceeding this assessable value is being
 increased to 15% for leather footwear and 20% on footwear of synthetic
 resins.
 (3) Janata soaps of value not exceeding Rs.10,000 per metric tonne bear a
 lower rate of excise duty of 5%. I propose to raise the value limit to
 Rs.12,000 per metric tonne. This should reduce the cost of cheaper toilet
 and laundry soaps. Soaps of value between Rs.12,000 per metric tonne
 and Rs.25,000 per metric tonne will continue to pay duty at 15% but
 expensive soaps, whose value exceeds Rs.25,000 per metric tonne, will
 be charged 25%.
 20

 (4) Complete exemption from excise duty is available in respect of shoddy
 wollen fabrics of assessable value not exceeding Rs.40 per sq. mtr. I
 propose to raise this limit to Rs.60 per sq. mtr. Shoddy blankets are
 already fully exempt from excise duty.
 (5) Excise duty on fluorescent tubes is being reduced to the specific rate of
 Rs. 2 per tube. The other fittings and parts of such tubes will also pay
 reduced excise duty at the rate of 10%.
 (6) I also propose to exempt, from excise duty, bio-gas appliances such as
 stoves, hot plates and lights. This would encourage greater use of bio-
 gas.
 (7) Specified life-saving equipment is presently fully exempt from customs
 duty but import of spares needed for such equipment attracts duty. This
 is an unnecessary burden on our hospitals and clinics. I propose full
 exemption also for spares and accessories of such life-saving equipments.
 (8) Items like note-books, letter-pads, blotting pads, registers, account books,
 file covers are being exempted from excise duty altogether.
 126. I have two proposals for cotton textiles:-
 (i) I propose to liberalise the Small-Scale Scheme for hand-processed fabrics
 by increasing the full exemption limit from 36 lakh sq. mtrs. to 50 lakh
 sq. mtrs. in case of hand-processed cotton fabrics.
 (ii) The excise duty structure on cotton fabrics in the power- processing sector
 is being rationalised. Specific rates of excise duty are being provided in
 respect of fabrics of value upto Rs.25 per sq. mtr. This will involve a
 revenue loss of Rs. 15 crores.
 127. I propose to remove excise duty on wool tops altogether. However, I
propose to increase the customs duty on raw wool, woollen rags and wool waste from
20% to 30% and reduce the customs duty on synthetic rags from 80% to 30%. Excise
duty on polyester-wool-blended yarn is also proposed to be reduced from Rs.30 per
kg. to Rs. 15 per kg. This will benefit cheaper varieties of woollen textiles.
 128. The present rates of duty on viscose staple fibre and viscose filament yarn
have not been revised for a number of years. As a revenue measure, I propose to
increase the excise duty on viscose staple fibre from Rs. 5 per kg. to Rs. 7 per kg.
Similarly, excise duty on viscose filament yarn is also being increased by about 12.5%
of the existing rates. These measures together will give us an additional revenue of
Rs. 29 crores.
 129. As the House is aware, there is a scheme which has replaced sales-tax on
sugar, tobacco and textiles by an Additional Excise Duty (AED). The proceeds of
 21

AED go entirely to the State Governments. The AED is required to be raised to reach
the agreed level of tax incidence. The rate of duty on costlier fabrics of assessable
value exceeding Rs.100 per sq. mtr. is being increased to 20%. The total revenue gain
of AED will be Rs. 40 crores and will be passed on wholly to State Governments.
 130. I now propose to deal with some other industries which require relief:Ð
 (1) As a result of recent policies, cement production has grown rapidly
 benefiting the consumer and converting a sellers market into a buyers
 market. The newer units in the industry need some support in view of
 their high capital costs. I, therefore, propose a rebate of excise duty at the
 rate of Rs.50 per metric tonne in respect of portland cement manufactured
 by units commencing production of such cement on or after 1.4.1986.
 This rebate will be available for a period of three years from 1.3.1987.
 The levy quota in respect of such units is also being reduced from the
 existing 30% to 15%. The excise concession will be available only to
 those units whose aggregate production is not less than 30% of the licensed
 capacity.
 (2) I propose to allow imports of specified machinery for improvement in
 productivity and quality of solvent-extracted oils and oilmeals at concessional
 duty rate of 55%. Last year, we introduced a system of rebate in excise
 duties for vanaspati and soap linked to larger use of minor oils. This has
 had the desired effect and production of rice-bran oil as well as its use in
 vanaspati and soap have increased considerably. The rebate scheme is being
 continued this year. There are some procedural changes and the ad valorem
 duty on vanaspati is being changed to a specific duty.
 (3) Better food-packaging and food-processing can contribute greatly to raise
 the income of our farmers. I have already made some proposals in plastics
 which will help. I further propose to reduce the import duty on specified
 items of machinery and aseptic packaging from 101% to 50%.
 (4) I propose to exempt 36 more drug intermediates used either exclusively
 or predominantly in the manufacture of drugs from additional duty of
 customs. In addtion, I propose to lower the customs duty to 70% on two
 specified drug intermediates required for the manufacture of pyrazinamide,
 an anti-TB drug.
 (5) Customs duty on specified raw materials for refractories is being reduced.
 (6) It is proposed to reduce excise duty on unwrought aluminium of CG-
 grade from 13% to 11%.
 (7) I propose to reduce excise duty on feature films, including dubbed feature
 films by about 10% of the existing duty leviable.
 22

 (8) Denatured-ethyl-alcohol of specified strength, when imported for use
 exclusively for industrial purposes, is being exempted from customs duty
 in excess of 60% ad valorem.
 (9) It is proposed to merge the two existing SSI schemes for the refrigeration
 and air-conditioning appliances and machinery industry into one and to
 liberalise it. Full exemption from excise duty will now be available for
 clearance upto Rs. 5 lakhs. Thereafter, 50% of the excise duty leviable
 will be applicable for clearance between Rs. 5 lakhs and Rs. 15 lakhs.
 Subsequently, the unit will pay the normal duty but eligibility limit for
 retaining exemption and concessions for the unit will be Rs. 40 lakhs.
 (10) I propose to extend the concessional rate of customs duty of 20% in
 respect of HBI (Hot Briquetted Iron)/ sponge iron and melting scrap of
 steel available to electric arc furnace units to induction furnace units also.
 (11) Customs duty on fluorspar (natural calcium fluoride) used for manufacture
 of aluminium fluoride is being reduced from 110% to 75%.
 (12) I also propose to reduce customs duty to 25% for plant and equipment
 needed for manufacture of family-planning apparatus and appliances and
 also of equipment using non-conventional energy sources. The same low-
 duty rate is being applied for certain specified sophisticated fire-fighting
 equipment for fire-fighting services administered by Central/State/U.T.
 Governments and local bodies.
 131. In looking for more revenue, I have to fall back on the ever dependable
and reliable friend of Finance Ministers and the certified enemy of Health Ministers.
Lately, I am told, the friendly relationship has been marred by disputes and litigation.
I now propose to restore amity between the two by moving over to a new and more
rational system of levying excise duties.
 132. The existing scheme of excise duty on cigarettes is based on the printed
retail price. I propose to move over to an entirely new scheme of specific excise duty
based on the length of the cigarette. This is the system prevalent in many countries.
It ensures unambiguous determination of the excise duty, avoiding all problems of
determining either assessable value or sale value.
 133. It is proposed that for non-filter cigarettes of size upto 70mm, the excise
duty would be Rs.150 per 1000 cigarettes. In case of filter cigarettes, the excise duty
will be in four slabs namely, upto 70 mm, over 70 upto 75 mm, over 75 upto 85mm,
over 85 upto 100mm. The rates of duty per 1000 filter cigarettes in these slabs will
be Rs.200, Rs.300, Rs.400 and Rs.600, respectively. The tariff rate for cigarettes is
Rs.700 and, therefore, non-filter cigarettes beyond 70 mm length and filter cigarettes
beyond 100 mm length will pay the tariff rate.
 23

 134. This scheme will be a major simplification and rationalisation measure.
Incidentally, it will also yield additional revenue to Government of Rs.200 crores!
 135. I will now mention some other measures largely of rationalisation:Ð
 (1) Denudation of our forests is causing serious damage to our environment.
 The tax structure must also make a contribution towards preservation of
 our forest wealth. With this objective in view, we have rationalised the
 duty structure on wood products. I propose to levy a uniform rate of
 excise duty of 20% on wood products based on waste wood such as
 particle-board, insulation and hard- boards and fibre-boards. A higher
 rate of 30% will be levied on all plywoods made from prime timber. I
 invite suggestions from Members and other conservationists and I am
 prepared to take further measures which would implement this policy
 objective.
 (2) Excise duty on snuff and chewing tobacco or products containing chewing
 tobacco is being imposed at the rate of 25% .
 (3) A large number of exemption notifications in customs have the effect of
 lowering the rate of duty below 25% for many items. In order to prevent
 invoicing malpractices, rates of duty should not be below 25% except in
 very special circumstances. Accordingly, duty rates are being raised to
 25% for 7 items. In a few other cases, the duty rates have been reviewed
 and increased.
 (4) The concessional rate of 25% (basic) in respect of soda ash will continue
 until 31st March, 1988.
 (5) The 70% concessional duty on 13 specified parts of mechanical and quartz
 analogue wrist watches will continue for another year with certain
 modifications. The rate of duty is being enhanced to 100% for three
 specified parts. The concessional rate in respect of certain other parts of
 wrist watches is being withdrawn altogether.
 (6) The excise duty on aerated soft drink is being increased by 20 paise per
 bottle and in the case of soda, by 15 paise per bottle. Soda and soft drinks
 in packagings other than bottles will have a duty of 60% and 75%,
 respectively. MODVAT benefits will now be available to these items.
 Hence, the effective incidence will be considerably lower.
 (7) Processed foods of various types are charged 15% excise duty. The list of
 such processed and relatively expensive packaged foods is being extended
 to noodles, spaghetti, macaroni, vermicelli, flakes of cereals, ready-to-
 cook food- mixes, etc. put up for sale in unit containers.
 24

 (8) Basic customs duty on unwrought aluminium is proposed to be raised
 from 20% ad valorem to 35% plus the normal additional duty. This is
 necessitated by the upward revision of domestic aluminium prices to equate
 the landed cost of imported metal with the statutory price per tonne.
 (9) I propose to raise the excise duty on steel ingots made by mini-steel plants
 from Rs.315 per tonne to Rs.365 per tonne so as to equate the duty with
 steel ingots produced by the integrated steel plants. Even at the revised
 rate, the ad valorem incidence of excise duty will be lower than on the
 steel produced by integrated plants because of substantial MODVAT credit
 and higher prices.
 136. I am also taking this opportunity to bring the surplus of the Oil Pool
Account into the tax-net. This will have no effect on consumer prices. This surplus
presently accrues to Government as non-tax receipts. I now propose to raise the
customs duty on imported crude petroleum by Rs.500 per tonne. I also propose to
increase the ceiling limits upto which excise duty by way of cess for the development
of oil industry may be levied on crude oil and natural gas produced in India. The
limits are proposed to be raised from Rs.300 per tonne to Rs.1000 per tonne on crude
oil and from Rs.50 to Rs.300 per thousand cubic metres on natural gas. The effective
rate of cess on crude oil is proposed to be raised from 1st March, 1987 from Rs.300
to Rs.600 per tonne. The proposals are expected to yield Rs.800 crores by way of
customs duty and Rs.900 crores by way of cess with an equivalent reduction in non-
tax receipts. These increases will be absorbed fully by the Pool Account and will not
affect prices paid by the consumer in any way.
 137. Apart from the above proposals, I have proposed certain amendments in
the Finance Bill seeking to effect changes in the excise and customs tariffs. These
amendments are merely enabling provisions and have no revenue significance. Besides,
there are several proposals for amendments in existing notifications, excise rules which
have merely procedural significance. In order to save the time of the House, I do not
propose to recount them. Provision in the Finance Bill is also being made for
continuation of the levy of auxiliary duty of customs and Special Excise duty.
 138. Copies of notifications giving effect to the changes in customs and excise
duties effective from 1st March, 1987, will be laid on the table of the House in due
course.
 139. My proposals in respect of Customs and Central Excise duties outlined
above are likely to yield additional revenue of Rs.531.73 crores from Customs duties
and Rs.431.80 crores from Excise duties. The concessions and reliefs aggregate
Rs.464.81 crores on the Customs side and Rs.130.00 crores on the Excise side. The
net additional revenue from Customs duties thus would be Rs.66.92 crores and that
from Excise duties, Rs.301.80 crores. In Excise duties, the Centre’s share would be
Rs.109.48 crores and that of States, Rs.192.32 crores. Out of the total net additional
 25

yield of Rs.368.72 crores, Centre’s share would be Rs.176.40 crores and that of the
States, Rs.192.32 crores.
 140. I had earlier mentioned that the Budget deficit at the existing rates of
taxes would be Rs.6,010 crores. The proposed tax measures, taken together with
reliefs, are estimated to yield net additional revenue of Rs.322 crores to the Centre.
This will leave an uncovered deficit of Rs.5,688 crores. This is significantly lower
than the deficit for the current year. As mentioned earlier, I have decided that this
shall not be exceeded. I have set in motion measures to implement this decision.
 141. Mr. Speaker, Sir, I am conscious of the enormous challenges that confront
our economy. Some are inherent in the process of planned development in a democracy.
But some are in the nature of a price that we have to pay for pursuing an independent
foreign policy. The people of India have asserted their independence and willingly
accepted these burdens. Their heroic exertions, their sacrifices, and their unshakable
confidence in their capacity to build the India of their dreams are a source of strength,
inspiration and direction to me. Let us move forward with determination.
 142. I commend the Budget to the House.
 [28th February, 1987]




 26

