 PART B
 62. The gap of Rs.1396 crores is clearly a very substantial gap and places on my
shoulders a difficult and challenging responsibility to find ways and means of bridging
the gap. I have already enumerated a number of favourable factors in the national
economy which give us the necessary strength and opportunity to manage the economy
even with a large though reasonable deficit without creating inflationary conditions.
However, prudence would require that the deficit, no matter how reasonable, should
be kept as low as possible and it is, therefore, necessary to mobilise additional resources
to the maximum extent possible. I am sure that the nation will willingly make a
substantial contribution towards the fulfilment of a national Plan of a magnitude which
will enable us to reach our objectives at a faster pace.
 63. In making my proposals for resource mobilisation I have borne in mind
the salutary principles of tax policy which have been laid down in the Economic
Policy Resolution of the Janata Party issued in November, 1977. These principles bear
repetition.
 12

 “We believe that the taxation policy of the Government must keep in
mind five considerations:
 (1) Increased public investment expenditure must necessitate increased public
income. The people of the country, therefore, have to accept the burden of higher
taxation needed for investment in the future.
 (2) Taxation policy must simultaneously aim at redistributive justice and must
take into consideration the capacity to pay.
 (3) Taxes should be easy to collect and it should be easy for the taxpayer to
know what he has to pay. There is urgent need for the simplification and rationalisation
of the tax administration.
 (4) Taxes must have an in-built growth potential and inherent buoyancy.
 (5) Taxation policy must aim at stimulating national growth and must
encourage production and savings.”
 64. I have had the advantage also of receiving advice from all sections of
society and from all parts of the country. In addition I have received two important
reports - the interim report of the Chokshi Committee on Direct Taxes and the final
report of the Jha Committee on Indirect Taxes. These reports contain a number of
valuable suggestions and I have given them respectful consideration.
 65. Before I come to my taxation proposals 1 would like to make some
important policy announcements which have a bearing on the budgetary position.
 66. The demonetisation of high denomination bank notes was a step primarily
aimed at controlling illegal transactions. It is a part of a series of measures which
Government has taken and is determined to take against anti-social elements. Despite
the utmost vigilance of the Customs authorities and considerable seizures and
confiscations of smuggled gold, it is an unfortunate and distressing fact that gold
smuggling has to some degree continued. The substantial difference between Indian
gold prices and international gold prices has served as a temptation to smugglers.
Gold smuggling is not only illegal but has helped to sustain black money operations
and foreign exchange racketeering. It is, therefore, necessary for us to think of economic
measures in addition to preventive measures to tackle this evil of gold smuggling. We
have given very careful thought to the question and have decided to commence the
sale of gold from the stocks held by Government. The details of the scheme are being
worked out and will be announced shortly.
 67. There is an excellent market for Indian gold jewellery abroad which would
not only enable us to earn a significant amount of foreign exchange but also gainfully
employ the undoubted craftsmanship of Indian jewellers. Hitherto the export of gold
jewellery has been inhibited by the high local price of gold, restrictions placed on
 13

such exports and the complex and cumbersome bonding procedures. Government have,
therefore, decided to introduce a simplified scheme for the encouragement of the
export of gold jewellery. Such exports will be facilitated either by allowing importation
of gold or by the sale of Government gold stocks at international prices. The details of
the scheme will be announced very shortly.
 68. Members will recollect that the Janata Party manifesto had contained a
promise that the question of removing sales tax and octroi duties would be duly
considered by the Government. I have had a series of discussions with the Chief
Ministers and Finance Ministers of the States to achieve this desirable objective.
The total revenue from sales tax is of the order of Rs.2500 crores, and it is growing
steadily. It constitutes the main source of revenue of the States. The Chief Ministers
of the States have generally showed a lack of enthusiasm for the abolition of the
sales tax. In view of the attitude of the States and since sales tax is a State subject,
the task of persuading the States to give up sales tax calls for persistence and patience.
It certainly cannot be regarded as something which can be accomplished in the
immediate future.
 69. The octroi duty, however, stands on a different footing. The revenue from
octroi duty is of the order of Rs.250 crores. There has been a long standing demand
for the removal of this obnoxious levy which causes great inconvenience to trade and
the transport industry. All committees which have gone into the subject have
unanimously proposed its abolition. Studies have also revealed that the cost of collection
of the octroi duty is unduly high. There can be no two opinions that the removal of
octroi duty will be widely welcomed since its abolition will assist the orderly and
healthy growth of the transport system in the country and will considerably reduce
freight costs. I, therefore, propose to request the State Governments to introduce suitable
legislation for the removal of octroi. The octroi revenues are at present going to the
local authorities. Quite understandably they will seek from the State Governments a
reimbursement for the loss of revenue and in turn the State Governments will no
doubt claim a measure of compensation from the Centre. We shall hold discussions
with the State Governments for finding a satisfactory solution.
 70. I have now to say a few words on behalf of my colleague the Minister of
Communications. The upward revision of emoluments of employees in the past few
years has resulted in substantial increase in the expenditure of the Postal Branch of
the Posts and Telegraphs Department which is highly labour intensive. The revenues
have not, however, kept pace with the expenditure and the costs of various postal
services exceed the revenues earned. Consequently, the Postal Branch has been incurring
a deficit which is estimated at about Rs.23 crores in the current year. While there is
justification for increasing the tariffs for most of the postal services, it is proposed to
touch only those services which will not affect the common man, particularly in the
rural areas. A memorandum showing the proposed changes in the postal tariffs is
being circulated along with the Budget papers.
 14

 71. The tariff revisions, which will be given effect to from a date to be notified
by the Government after the Finance Bill is passed, are estimated to bring in an
additional revenue of Rs.13.73 crores per annum. The yield during 1978-79 is estimated
at Rs.11.44 crores. The results of the tariff revisions have been accounted for in
estimating the internal resources of the Posts and Telegraphs.
 72. I shall now deal with my proposals in the sphere of direct taxes.
 73. 1 have kept in view the fact that a substantial increase in investment has
necessarily to be backed by increased efforts at mobilisation of savings. My proposals
in the field of direct taxes are accordingly designed to promote larger savings; to
curb extravagant and wasteful expenditure in businesses and professions; and to
channelise funds for stimulating growth and production. I have also sought to provide
some tax relief in selected areas with a view to encouraging larger investment in
desired directions.
 74. In order to mobilise additional resources in the form of savings, I propose
to raise the rates of compulsory deposit in the case of income-tax payers. While
taxpayers having current income up to Rs.15,000 will continue to enjoy immunity
from the requirement of making compulsory deposit, in the case of incomes exceeding
Rs.15, 000 and up to Rs.25, 000 the rate will be raised from 4 per cent to 41 per cent.
On the slab of Rs.25, 001 to Rs.70, 000, compulsory deposit is currently made at the
rate of 10 per cent. I propose to split this slab into two. While the rate on the slab of
Rs.25, 001 to Rs.35, 000 will be 11 per cent, the rate on the slab of Rs.35, 001 to
Rs.70, 000 will be 121/2 per cent. On the slab over Rs.70, 000 the rate will be raised
from 12 per cent to 15 per cent. Approximately Rs.25 crores will accrue in 1978-79 as
a result of this measure.
 75. I propose to liberalise the concession in respect of long-term savings
through life insurance, provident fund contributions and other approved forms of saving.
At present, 100 per cent of the first Rs.4, 000 of the qualifying savings, 50 per cent of
the next Rs.6,000 and 40 per cent of the balance is allowed as deduction in computing
the taxable income. I propose to allow a deduction equal to 100 per cent of the first
Rs.5,000 of the qualifying savings. The quantum of deduction in respect of the next
Rs.5,000 will continue at the existing rate of 50 per cent and, in respect of the
balance, at the existing rate of 40 per cent. The monetary limit for the savings qualifying
for deduction under this provision is also being raised from Rs.20,000 to Rs.30,000.
These measures will result in a revenue loss of Rs.10 crores in a full year and Rs.7.5
crores in 1978-79.
 76. Investors understandably prefer investment which brings them a safe return,
which is provided by fixed deposits in banks or shares of established companies with
a good record for payment of dividends. This results in new companies not attracting
adequate support. In order to stimulate such investment, I propose to give a deduction
in the computation of taxable income of 50 per cent of the amount invested in equity
 15

shares of new industrial companies. The maximum investment in a year qualifying for
this deduction will be limited to Rs.10,000. This will entail a loss of Rs.5 crores in a
full year and Rs.3.5 crores in 1978-79. I would cheerfully accept a much larger loss if
it results in stimulating larger investments.
 77. Last year, I had introduced a provision to exempt capital gains in cases
where the sale proceeds arising from the transfer of an asset are reinvested within six
months in units of the Unit Trust of India, shares of Indian companies, bank deposits
and other specified assets. In order that this concession leads to the flow of investible
funds into fresh ventures, I propose to provide with immediate effect that investment
in shares of. Indian companies will be taken into account for the purposes of exemption
from capital gains tax only where the investment is made in equity shares of new
industrial companies.
 78. Banks allow substantial advances against the security of fixed deposits
with them. Hence, taxpayers who get exemption from capital gains tax by making
such deposits obtain an unduly large tax benefit without commensurate sacrifice. I
have, therefore, decided that fixed deposits with banks made after today will not
qualify as an eligible mode of investment for the purposes of this exemption.
 79. The annual letting value of a newly constructed house is reduced for tax
purposes by an amount up to Rs.1,200 in respect of each residential unit for a period
of five years. With a view to providing a stimulus for construction of houses, particularly
for persons in the low and middle income brackets, 1 propose to raise the monetary
limit of Rs.1,200 to Rs.2,400.
 80. Initial depreciation allowance is currently granted at the rate of 20 per
cent on the cost of new buildings erected by employers for their low paid
employees. In order to give a greater impetus to the construction of buildings for
workeRs.I propose to Increase the rate of initial depreciation allowance from 20
per cent to 40 per cent.
 81. The foreign remuneration of Indian citizens employed outside India is
liable to Indian income-tax if their stay in India exceeds a specified period. As this
results in avoidable hardship and discourages such persons from spending even a
reasonable period on vacation in their home country, I propose to provide that Indian
citizens employed outside India may stay on vacation in the country for 89 days in a
year without attracting such tax liability.
 82. In order to ensure that winnings from horse races are effectively brought
within the tax net, I propose to provide for deduction of tax at source at the rate of
34.5 per cent from winnings in excess of Rs,2,500. This measure would yield Rs.4
crores in a full year and Rs.3.5 crores in 1978-79.
 83. Extravagant and socially wasteful expenditure is often incurred on
advertisement, publicity and sales promotion. In order to put a curb on such expenditure
 16

at the cost of the exchequer, I propose to provide for the disallowance of a part of such
expenditure in the computation of taxable profits. Where the aggregate expenditure on
advertisement, publicity and sales promotion in India does not exceed 114 per cent of
the turnover or gross receipts of the business or profession, 10 per cent of such
expenditure will be disallowed in computing the taxable profits. Where such aggregate
expenditure exceeds 114 per cent but does not exceed 112 per cent of the turnover or
gross receipts, the disallowance will be made at the rate of 121 per cent; and where
such expenditure exceeds 112 per cent of the turnover or gross receipts, the disallowance
will be made at the rate of 15 per cent. These provisions will not apply in cases where
the aggregate expenditure on advertisement, publicity and sales promotion does not
exceed Rs.20, 000 in a year. Newly established industrial concerns will also be exempted
from this provision for an initial period of three years. This measure will yield Rs.31
crores in a full year and about Rs.25 crores in 1978-79.
 84. A weighted deduction is currently allowed in the computation of taxable
profits with reference to expenditure incurred by Indian companies and resident
taxpayers, other than companies, on development of export market. The weighted
deduction is allowed at the rate of 150 per cent of the acutal expenditure in the case
of widely-held companies and at the rate of 133.3 per cent in the case of other taxpayers.
While the full deduction of expenditure incurred for development of export markets is
entirely justifiable, and no part of such expenditure will be disallowed under the
proposed provision for disallowance of expenditure on advertisement, publicity and
sales promotion, I do not see adequate justification now for continuing to subsidise
such expenditure by the grant of weighted deduction. I, therefore, propose to discontinue
the grant of weighted deduction in relation to such expenditure incurred after 31st
March, 1978. This measure is likely to yield Rs.10 crores in a full year and Rs.8
crores in 1978-79.
 85. In the case of a taxpayer who has previously been assessed to income-tax,
advance tax becomes payable only if a notice in this behalf is issued by the Income-tax
Officer. Hence, if an advance tax notice is not issued in the case of such a taxpayer,
he will have no liability to pay any advance tax. On the other hand, taxpayers who
have not been assessed to income-tax, are required to pay advance tax on their own on
the basis of their estimated current income. To my mind, the existing legal position is
clearly unsatisfactory. I, therefore, propose to provide that advance tax shall be
voluntarily paid by every person if his current income exceeds the specified limit.
 86. The Direct Tax Laws Committee under the chairmanship of Shri C.C.
Chokshi submitted its interim report last December. The report contains a number of
valuable suggestions for simplification and rationalisation of tax laws, streamlining
assessment procedures, reducing the area of litigation and accelerating the disposal of
appeals and references In its report on the Central Direct Taxes Administration, the
Administrative Reforms Commission had recommended that amendments to the tax
laws should not be rushed through the annual Finance Bill, which needs to be passed
 17

before a prescribed date, but made through separate bins whose provisions can be
considered in detail. Pursuant to this recommendation, I propose to introduce separate
legislation as early as possible to give effect to the main recommendations of the
Chokshi Committee which are acceptable to the Government. In the meanwhile, a few
changes recommended by the committee, such as deduction of tax at source from race
winnings and voluntary payment of advance tax, which could be easily incorporated
in the tax law, have been introduced through the Finance Bill.
 87. The exemption limit for estate duty, which is Rs.50,000 was fixed as long
ago as 1958. As this exemption limit is unduly low, I propose to raise it to Rs.1 lakh.
Since, in this matter, we can move only with the concurrence of the State Legislatures,
a Bill for implementing this proposal, and certain other proposals in relation to estate
duty, will be introduced later this year.
 88. The total additional revenue from the various measures enumerated by
me will yield Rs.30 crores in a full year and Rs.25.5 crores during 1978-79. Besides,
additional resources of about Rs.25 crores will accrue in the form of compulsory
deposits in the financial year 1978-79.
 89. May I now turn to my proposals relating to indirect taxes? Our basic
national problem, and indeed this is a problem facing all developing countries, is that
the base for direct taxes is extremely narrow and the vast funds required for national
development cannot, therefore, be raised, at our present stage of development, from
direct taxes alone. While framing the proposals relating to indirect taxes, however, I
have kept in mind the need to protect small scale industry and to minimise the hardship
to the poor and the middle class consumers.
 90. Honourable Members are aware that Government had appointed a
committee, to review the existing structure of the indirect tax system, under the
chairmanship of Shri L.K.Jha. The committee has now submitted its final report.
Amongst the important recommendations made by the committee are restructuring of
the pattern of central excise and customs duties, measures to assist the small scale
sector, the general reorientation of the tariff to make it income-elastic and the desirability
of introducing a value added tax so as to avoid the cascading effect of taxes on raw
materials and components of finished products. The committee has also made some
recommendations regarding indirect taxes levied by State Governments and local
authorities. Government has been examining an these recommendations with the care
which they deserve. In my last Budget, I had in fact accepted and implemented a few
of the recommendations which were available to us in the interim report of the
committee.. The proposals which I am making today incorporate some of the
recommendations made in the final report. Other recommendations which involve a
major restructuring of the system would require further study.
 91. In the Plan outlay the topmost priority has been accorded to power. The
Plan provision for power generation and distribution is of the order of Rs.2, 200
 18

crores in 1978- 79. 1 feel that with our enormous investments in power, there is ample
justification for claiming a contribution from those who benefit from these investments.
I am, therefore, proposing to levy a duty of 2 paise per kilowatt-hour on electricity
generated. Electricity generated for captive consumption, as well as that used in the
auxiliary plants in the generating stations for the generation of electricity, is being
exempted. I also propose to give a rebate of the duty to the producer in respect of
electricity used for agricultural purposes so that agriculturists are not affected. This
levy is expected to yield a revenue of Rs.145 crores.
 92. After the nationalisation of the coal mines, coal production has increased
from about 72 million tonnes in 1971-72 to about 100 million tonnes in 1976-77. This
is the result of enormous investments made by the State after nationalisation -
investments which we will continue to make. Here again, the beneficiaries could, I
think, justifiably be called upon to bear a small levy of central excise duty on coal. I
propose to fix-this at rates varying from Rs.5 to Rs.10 per tonne. The lowest rate of
Rs.5 would cover three-fourth of the coal produced in the country. This measure is
expected to yield a revenue of Rs.58 crores.
 93. Under Item 68 of the Central excise tariff, the rate of duty leviable on “all
articles, not elsewhere specified” is at present 2 per cent ad valorem, I propose to raise
this to the level of 5 per cent. ad valorem. While doing so, I propose to exempt some
sensitive categories of goods, namely, pesticides, weedicides, insecticides and fungicides
drugs and medicines other than proprietary or patent drugs and medicines,
pharmaceuticals and drug intermediates, from the whole of the duty leviable under
this item. Newspapers and periodicals are also being exempted completely. The existing
exemption in respect of small manufacturers whose clearance of excisable goods does
not exceed Rs.30 lakhs in the preceding year will continue. These proposals will yield
a revenue of Rs.100 crores.
 94. In view of the paramount need for mobilising resources for development
without creating fresh distortions in the tax structure I propose to levy a special duty
at the rate of 1120th of the basic excise duties presently collected on each item in the
Central Excise tariff. In doing so, I propose to exempt coal, electricity and goods
which are assesseed under Item 68 of the tariff. This measure will result in an additional
revenue of Rs.214 crores on indigenous production and a sum of Rs.15 crores by way
of increase in countervailing duties on imports.
 95. May I now turn to the relief which I propose to give. First of all, consistent
with the policy of the Government to encourage the small manufacturer and to widen
the entrepreneurial base in the country, I propose to provide sufficient relief to small
manufacturers so as to enable them to compete successfully with larger units. The
duty exemptions at present available to small scale manufacturers are not based on
any one pattern. Over the course of years, a number of ad hoc concessions have been
given and the principles of relief have varied very widely. In defining the small units,
 19

a variety of formulae have been adopted, such as, value of clearances per annum,
quantity of clearances per annum, value of capital investment on plant and machinery,
number of workers, use of power, and a combination of two or more of these criteria.
Keeping in view the need for rationalising the pattern of relief to small industries and
bearing in mind the recommendations made by the Jha Committee, I propose to exempt
all small scale units manufacturing specified goods, whose clearances in the preceding
year did not exceed Rs.15 lakhs, from the duty payable on the first clearance of Rs.5
lakhs. The exemption will cover 69 items including, amongst others, medicines, soap
and detergents, paints and varnishes, household electrical goods, steel furniture metal
containers, aerated waters, vegetable non-essential oils, ceramics and other items
notified. This measure will benefit about 24,000 units currently under excise control.
It will reduce considerably the procedural requirements which these units are required
to follow. It will also remove the anomaly, under which relief is presently lost totally
in many cases, the moment the threshold limits of exemption are crossed. This relief
will be effective from the beginning of the next financial year and involve a revenue
sacrifice of Rs.28 crores.
 96. I propose to exempt power-driven pumps mainly used in agriculture from
the whole of the excise duty leviable thereon. The measure will involve a loss of
Rs.1.5 crores per annum.
 97. I also propose to extend the concession currently available to
motor-vehicles used as taxis to 3-wheeler auto-rickshaws as well, by reducing the rate
of duty leviable on the latter by 21 per cent ad valorem. Whole milk powder is being
exempted from payment of the duty leviable thereon. in an effort to make available
this commodity at a cheaper rate. I also propose to reduce the rate of duty leviable on
small refrigerators of a capacity of 100 litres and less from 40 per cent ad valorem to
30 per cent ad valorem. At present, parts of refrigerating and air-conditioning machinery
required for installation in specified establishments are assessed at a concessional rate
of 20 per cent. This concession is being extended to ready assembled airconditioning
units of the window and package type, generally used by smaller industrial installations.
Last year I had raised the excise duty on films substantially. There have been a number
of representations against the increase and the manner in which it affects the industry.
I have carefully considered the matter and propose to reduce the excise duty leviable
from Rs.7, 500 to Rs.5,000 on the third dozen slab of colour prints, of length 4,000
metres or less. Suitable adjustments are being made in the case of black and white
films as well as longer films. Duty on prints cleared for home consumption after
twelve months from the date of first release of the film for public exhibition is also
being reduced suitably. These proposals together imply a relief of about Rs.3 crores.
 98. In pursuance of Government’s decisions on the Oil Prices Committee’s
Report, the tariff structure relating to lubricating oils and greases has also been
rationalised. This measure of rationalisation will yield Rs.6 3 lakhs net in a year.
 20

 99. I have also carried out some modifications in respect of coated fabrics,
cigars and cheroots, tea waste, vegetable products for industrial purposes and
non-cellulosic wastes, the details of which are given in the Budget documents. These
proposals will yield a revenue of Rs.6 crores.
 100. I have taken note of the significant suggestions in regard to customs duties
made by the Jha Committee. As a measure of relief and particularly with a view to
bringing down capital costs, I propose to reduce the customs duties m specified items
of capital equipment not produced indigenously from the current level of ’40 per cent
to 25 per cent. The revenue loss will be of the order of Rs.9 crores.
 101. I also propose to reduce the duty leviable on condenser tissue paper and
polypropylene film used in the manufacture of capacitors, by 111 per cent and 155 per
cent respectively. Use of capacitors will reduce transmission losses and will thus help
the more efficient transmission of power. Duty m electrical insulation paper is also
being reduced. These proposals will involve a revenue sacrifice of about Rs.4 crores.
 102. Certain reliefs are also being given in respect of specified items of
cinematograph machinery, electronic components and Imported feature films. These
together will involve a revenue sacrifice of Rs.58 lakhs.
 103. I have only one proposal for upward modification of the customs tariff,
not so much as a measure of raising revenue but as a measure of protection to Indian
industry. I propose to increase the import duty on polyester filament yarn from 120
per cent to 200 per cent ad valorem. This will yield about Rs.6.4 crores in a year.
 104. My proposals for customs and Central excise duties put together will
yield an additional revenue of Rs.499 crores for 1978-79.
 105. The fiscal strategy underlying my proposals seeks to take advantage of
the favourable food and foreign exchange situation for generating fresh expansionary
impulses in our economy. The big step up in public investment is one element of this
strategy. Monetary policy must also be used to reinforce fiscal policy.
 106. The House will recollect that Government had imposed a tax in 1974 on
interest income of banks. Honourable Members will agree with me that, now that
prices are reasonably stable and there is urgent need to stimulate productive investment,
-this tax has lost its economic justification. I propose, therefore, to withdraw the
interest-tax with immediate effect. As a sequel to this fiscal concession with a monetary
intent, the Reserve Bank of India will be announcing later in the day the realignment
of the interest rate structure.
 107. The Budget Estimates for 1978- 79 have taken credit for an amount of
Rs.130 crores on account of interest-tax. Since the interest-tax for the months of
January and February, 1978 will be payable in the coming year, the actual loss of
revenue will be of the order of Rs.108 crores.
 21

 108. To sum up, my efforts at mobilisation of additional resources will yield in
1978-79 Rs.549.5 crores, of which Rs.499 crores will be from Union Excise and
customs duties, Rs.25.5 crores from direct taxes and Rs.25 crores as compulsory
deposits. Out of this, the States’ share will be Rs.95.5 crores and the Centre’s share
Rs.454 crores. With the withdrawal of interest-tax, the net additional resources accruing
to the Centre will be Rs.346 crores.
 109. Despite the effort which I have made at raising additional resources, I am
leaving an uncovered budgetary gap of Rs.1, 050 crores. This figure will be reduced
by the receipts from sales of Government gold. For reasons which Honourable Members
will appreciate I shall not attempt to estimate this figure. But I should share with
Honourable Members the view 1 hold that, apart from preventing any resurgence of
gold smuggling, it is also justifiable, in our present circumstances, to utilise a part of
our accumulated gold to reduce the expansionary effect of budgetary transactions. It
is m the same reasoning that we have been anxious to deploy a part of our foreign
exchange reserves to offset the expansionary impact of larger Plan and investment
outlays; and 1 am confident that in the coming year the steps initiated to liberalise
imports and the major investment programme that we now propose to undertake, will
lead to a significant draw down of foreign exchange reserves. These two factors
combined with continued vigilance regarding credit should limit the net increase in
money supply to safe levels.
 110. I am satisfied that the resultant monetary expansion will not lead to any
inflationary pressure particularly in view of the large stock of foodgrains and the
much greater ability that we have at present to import essential consumer goods. The
experience we have gained and the instruments we have forged in supply management
through procurement and public distribution and demand management through credit
and monetary policy should also enable us to contain such pressures.
 111. In conclusion let me summarise what I seek to achieve through this Budget.
My goal is to set in motion a process of sustained increase in output and employment,
particularly in the rural areas. The programme of government expenditure on investment
is the main instrument I wish to use to attain this goal. Investment expenditure in
infrastructure facilities is being raised steeply so that bottlenecks coming in the way
of further growth are removed and there is an improvement in the general economic
climate. This has made it necessary for me to undertake sizable additional resource
mobilisation. At the same time 1 have not hesitated to offer incentives and tax
concessions where these are called for to promote investment in agriculture and industry.
 112. The economic situation of the country is exceptionally favourable at present
for a bold step forward. This Budget is such a step.
 (February 28, 1978)


 22

