 PART B


 58. Sir, I now present my tax proposals.
 59. I will start with indirect taxes, with excise first. The multiple rates of indirect
tax are generally recognised to be a major source of misclassification, tax evasion
and avoidance and cumbersome litigation. The multiplicity also encourages inefficient
allocation of resources. Over a 100 countries in the world now enjoy the benefits of
a Value Added Tax (VAT) with very small number of rates in each case.
 60. In my last Budget, I had clearly stated my resolve to rationalise the rate-
structure so as to reduce the multiplicity of rates and ensure convergence towards a
central rate with a merit rate and a demerit rate. Most of our major industry
associations have also called for a triple rate excise structure.
 61. My excise proposals today largely fulfil my intent announced 9 months
ago. Specifically, I propose to reduce the existing 11 major ad valorem rates to 3,
namely, a central rate of 16%, a merit rate of 8% and a demerit rate of 24%. To
achieve this, I propose to:
 * Merge the existing rates of 5%, 10% and 12% into the existing 8% rate;
 * Create a new rate of 16% by merging the existing 13%, 15% and 18% rates
 into it; and
 * Fix a new rate of 24% in substitution of the existing rate of 25%.
 Honourable Members may notice that I have reduced the previously announced
central rate of 18% to 16%. This means lower costs and prices. There is also a happy
coincidence that this rate is almost identical to the rate of one-sixth (Shadbhaga)
advised by Kautilya, the noble sage of Pataliputra, which also happens to be my
birthplace.
 62. Considerations of revenue in this difficult year, however, persuade me to
fix 2 slabs of surcharge (special duty of excise) of 6% and 16% over the rate of 24%
on commodities which today carry a rate of duty of 30% and 40%. Thus total excise
on these commodities will remain unchanged. Petrol will continue to be taxed at
32%. The surcharge structure gives a clear indication that in future the Government
would gradually phase them down to the demerit rate of 24%.
 63. As a result of these changes the excise rates for many commodities will
either come down, or remain unchanged or be adjusted marginally upwards by a 1%
point. In the one major area of machinery and capital goods where the basic rate is
rising from 13% to 16%, I must point out that excise on such products are eligible
for MODVAT credit in the hands of the buyer. Furthermore, to help the capital
goods sector, my customs duty proposals include removal of the long standing anomaly
by which the duty rate on the major input, steel, is higher than the duty rate on
finished capital goods. I must also emphasise that this major reform of the excise
rate structure is broadly revenue neutral. It does not impose additional tax burden
on industry as a whole. I am confident this major reform will stimulate productivity,
growth and employment.

 17
 64. Mr. Speaker, Sir, I now move on to my next proposal. I propose to garner
additional revenue by way of an additional duty on High Speed Diesel Oil (HSD).
Currently, international and domestic prices of crude oil and petroleum products
are unusually soft, and it is felt that raising some additional revenue through this
commodity would be an equitable method of resource mobilisation. Therefore, I
propose an additional duty of Re. 1 per litre on imported and domestic HSD, the
revenue from which will accrue entirely to the Centre. Of this duty, I propose to
allocate half to support the initiatives in rural development and social sectors. The
other portion of 50 paise of this duty as also the duty of Re.1 per litre levied with
effect from 2.6.1998 will be converted into a statutory cess and transferred to the
Central Road Fund. 30% of the Fund will be transferred to the State Governments
for development and maintenance of State Roads. The balance amount will be utilised
for development and maintenance of National highways and expressways and by the
Ministry of Railways for construction of Railways over-bridges and Railways safety
works at unmanned Railways crossings. This will cover the gap in the plan resources
of the Ministry of Railways for the year 1999-2000. It is estimated that we will be
able to collect an aggregate amount of Rs.4,591 crore as additional duty of excise
and Rs.363 crore as countervailing duty on domestically produced and imported
HSD over the year. The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas will announce
consequential changes in the price of HSD effective from midnight tonight. This will
also fulfil in a large measure the will of Parliament reflected in Resolution dated 13th
May, 1988, which contemplated earmarking a portion of the excise and customs
duties on petrol and diesel to raise resources for development of roads.
 65. In the last budget the MODVAT adjustment allowed to manufacturing units
had been capped at 95%. I propose to lift this cap on MODVAT claims and restore it
to 100%.
 66. Mr. Speaker, Sir, my budget proposals also contain a package for the Small
Scale Industry (SSI) sector consisting of the following components:
 * Under the specific excise duty concession schemes for units manufacturing
 cosmetics, refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment, I propose doubling
 of the turn-over under the eligibility criteria from Rs.50 lakh to Rs.100
 lakh; doubling of the duty free exemption slab from Rs.15 lakh to Rs.30
 lakh; and, an increase from Rs.15 lakh to Rs.20 lakh in the clearances
 eligible for duty at half the normal rates.
 * I propose to extend the benefit of the SSI exemption limits to small-scale
 units producing cotton yarn.
 * I propose to exempt small job workers engaged in printing of glazed tiles
 from the incidence of excise duty.
 * Currently, SSI units are not eligible for exemption from excise duty on
 products bearing the brand name of another manufacturer. I propose to
 extend the SSI exemption to goods bearing a brand name of another
 manufacturer, when produced by units located in the rural areas. The details
 of the scheme will be announced shortly.
 67. Under the current procedure, all manufacturing units are required to pay
excise duty at the time of clearance of goods from their manufacturing premises. As

 18
a measure of further simplification of administrative procedures, I propose to permit
SSI units to pay excise duty on a monthly basis with effect from 1.6.1999. Besides
constituting a significant step in the simplification of procedures, this change will
also improve the liquidity position of manufacturing units in the SSI Sector.
 68. I am proposing a similar procedural relaxation in respect of the requirement
of maintenance of excise records by factories. Henceforth, factories paying more
than Rs.5 crore excise duty in a year, will not be required to maintain their records
in a specific format prescribed by the excise department; and, the records maintained
in the normal course of their functioning would be accepted as adequate. This
amendment will take effect from 1.6.99.
 69. Currently, there are several commodities, which are enjoying either total
exemption from excise duty or are enjoying concessional excise duty. These
concessions were sanctioned in the past with reference to the specific circumstances
relating to that commodity prevailing at that point of time. With the lowering of
general rate of duties, the need for such exemptions and concessions has abated. I
propose to set up an Expert Committee to examine and advise on where the
exemptions should be retained and where they should be integrated into the new
rate structure. Their report should be available for consideration before the next
budget.
 70. As Hon’ble Members are aware, Government is empowered to grant
exemptions from excise duty on an adhoc basis. I do not consider such wide discretion
necessary. Hence, I propose to abolish Government’s power to grant adhoc exemptions
of excise duty except for goods of strategic nature, or for charitable purposes. I
propose abolition of similar powers on the customs duty side also.
 71. Mr. Speaker, Sir, I now turn to my proposals relating to customs duties. My
proposals here reflect a balance of differing considerations. On the one hand, we are
committed to a calibrated integration of our economy with the world economy. This
would entail further phasing down of our customs duties to Asian levels. On the
other hand, is the need to raise revenue and the fact that in a year of exceptional
turbulence and uncertainty in the world economy, our industry should be cushioned
against unusual surges of competitive pressure from imports.
 72. Sir, a special customs duty of 2% was imposed in the budget of 1996-97,
and a further special customs duty of 3% was imposed on certain items in 1997-98.
The special customs duty of 5% is in force till 31.3.1999. I have in the course of
another discussion assured this House that the period of validity of this special
customs duty will not be extended. I announce the discontinuance of the 5% special
customs duty with effect from 28.2.1999.
 73. After careful examination of various possibilities, and close interaction with
the apex organisations of Commerce and Industry, I propose to reduce the existing 7
major ad-valorem rates of customs duty to 5 basic rates. The new rates will be:
 - 5% - which will remain unchanged;
 - 15% by substituting the existing 10% rate;
 - 25% by merging the 20% and 25% rates;

 19
 - 35% by merging the 30% and 35% rates;
 - 40% - which will remain unchanged.
 74. The one industry in which a special regime of customs duty will apply is
the Information Technology sector. The Prime Minister has repeatedly emphasised
the importance of this sector for the country’s development in the new century and
millennium. Accordingly, I am proposing significant reduction in duty rates of a
number of critical inputs in this sector, such as ICs and micro assemblies, storage
devices and CD Roms, telecom equipment and optical fibres.
 75. To garner revenue to meet the country’s irreducible needs, I propose a
uniform surcharge of 10% on all commodities, excluding the following categories:
 - Crude Oil and Petroleum Products;
 - Items attracting 40% rate of basic duty;
 - Certain GATT- bound items;
 - Gold and Silver;
 The effect of the surcharge would be to raise the basic rate by 10%. Thus a basic
rate of 5% would become 5.5%, 15% would become 16.5% and so on.
 76. Taking into account that special customs duty is being discontinued, and
that crude oil and petroleum products are exempt from surcharge, the effective
import duty rates on these products will stand reduced. This is consistent with the
Government’s established policy of rationalising indirect taxes on these products in
an agreed time-frame.
 77. By exempting items attracting 40% rate of basic duty from the surcharge,
there is a modest but clear reduction in the peak rate of protective custom duty from
45% to 40%.
 78. Mr. Speaker, Sir, conceptually, I am averse to zero custom duty, since our
domestic industry generally merits some minimal protection. I have reviewed the
entire list of such commodities and to begin with I am proposing the imposition of
5% rate of duty for some of these commodities. In order to mitigate the impact of the
incidence of 5% rate of duty on such items which have previously enjoyed exemption,
I propose to exempt this category from the existing 4% special additional duty.
 79. I am rationalising the import duty structure of project imports. Under
this rationalisation, power generation, coal mining, refinery, telecom and fertilizer
projects will now attract a nominal basic customs duty of only 5%. However, they
will be subject to applicable rates of countervailing duty. The net impact of these
changes will not be significant in most cases. Mega Power Projects also will be an
exception to this.
 80. Mr. Speaker, Sir, as a result of the various proposals made in this
budget on the indirect taxes, the estimated revenue in 1999-2000 would be
Rs.1,17,625 crore, including a component of net additional resource mobilisation
of Rs.6,234 crore .

 20
 81. Last year, I had announced the setting up of an Authority for Advance
Rulings for Excise and Customs. The necessary legislation has been included in
this Finance Bill. Drawn on the lines of the Advance Rulings Authority on the Direct
Taxes, the proposed Authority would provide binding rulings on important issues,
so that intending investors will have a clear-cut indication of their duty liability in
advance.
 82. The Central Board of Excise & Customs has adopted a “Vision Document”
and the “Citizens Charter” which together present a blue print for the future and the
service standards that can be expected of the Customs and Excise Department. The
compliance of the service standards set out in the Charter is being closely monitored.
The Commissioners of Customs and field level officers have been directed to enhance
the quality of their service and have also been told that any non-compliance would
be viewed adversely.
 83. On the central excise side, the computerisation of assessment and audit
operations is being given focussed attention, and before long, electronic filing of
returns is proposed to be put into operation.
 84. Copies of the notifications giving effect to proposed changes in customs
and excise duties will be laid on the Table of the House in due course.
 85. Mr. Speaker, Sir, I now turn to the proposals on the direct tax side.
 86. With growing liberalisation of the economy has come the need for industrial
restructuring so that companies can focus better on their core activities. The corporate
sector has been voicing the need for a flexible fiscal policy for regulating business re-
organisations. In response to this need, I propose a comprehensive set of amendments
to the Income Tax Act to make such business re-organisations fully tax neutral. In
the case of amalgamation of companies, the existing requirement of routing the
proposal through Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction is being removed.
The legal provision is proposed to be amended so that the eligibility for tax concessions
is only contingent upon a minimum of 75% of the fixed assets of the amalgamating
company being absorbed in the amalgamated company, and subject to the condition
that the amalgamated company will continue the business of the amalgamating
company for a minimum of 5 years. An enabling provision will be provided through
the amendment of the Income-Tax Act, for the detailed guidelines to be issued
subsequently under the powers available from the statutory provision.
 87. In the case of de-mergers, I propose to introduce a legal provision so as to
permit the carry forward of accumulated losses and unabsorbed depreciation from
the de-merging company to the resultant company. I also propose to amend the
legal provisions so that, neither the companies involved, nor the shareholders, are
subject to capital gains tax as a result of the transactions. Further, it is proposed
that all fiscal concessions will survive for the unexpired period in the case of
amalgamation and de-mergers
 88. Mr. Speaker, Sir, Government has been greatly concerned about the
persisting sluggishness in the capital markets. Government is also distressed to
note the negative perception of some sections of the investing public in regard to the

 21
schemes operated by the Unit Trust of India. Based on the recommendations of the
Committee headed by Shri Deepak Parekh, and also taking into account a large
number of suggestions offered by various experts in the field, I now propose a
substantial fiscal package to restore the confidence of the shareholders in the UTI,
and more generally to invigorate the capital markets.
 89. First, I propose to fully exempt from income tax all income from UTI and
other Mutual Funds received in the hands of the investors. This will not only reduce
the incidence of tax, but will eliminate the inconvenience faced by small investors in
paying tax and claiming refund in connection with income derived from such
investments.
 90. Presently if the income in the hands of the investors is fully exempt from
tax, this income is subjected to dividend tax under Section 115 (O) of the Income Tax
Act, at the stage of distribution of the dividend by UTI or mutual funds. As a departure
from the policy, and as the second element of the package, I propose to continue for
3 years the exemption for US-64, Scheme as also for all open-ended equity-oriented
schemes of UTI and mutual funds - with more than 50% investment in equity - from
dividend tax. However, income distributed by Mutual Funds, where the equity
investment is less than 50%, will become subject to the 10% dividend tax.
 91. As a result of these two tax initiatives, investments in UTI and other Mutual
Funds will become much more attractive and equity-oriented schemes will be relatively
more attractive than schemes where equity investment is less than 50%. This should
encourage the return of small investor to the capital market and revive confidence.
 92. A complaint has often been voiced that there is discrimination between the
rate of long-term capital gains tax on transfer of shares and securities as between
residents and non-residents. The current rate of long-term capital gains tax for
resident Indians is 20% linked to a notional value of capital gains, computed with
reference to a Cost of Inflation Index. However, the rate of long-term capital gains
tax for non residents is only 10%. In response to this complaint, I now propose to
amend the law so as to cap the long-term capital gains tax for resident Indians on
transfer of shares and securities, at the 10% rate.
 93. In some of the ‘sunrise’ sectors of the economy, the management is adopting
a policy of offering stock options and Sweat Equity, to their employees. The tax
implications of such transactions are somewhat ambiguous. Therefore, I propose in
this budget to make certain amendments in the law, to put it beyond doubt that
such stock options will be taxed as a perquisite at the time of exercise of the option
by the employee, and later as capital gains at the time of sale of the security. These
amendments, I expect, will remove the grey areas which exist in the current law
relating to such transactions.
 94. For boosting high-tech sectors and supporting first generation
entrepreneurs, there is an acute need for higher investment in venture capital
activities. Very recently we have relaxed the guidelines under the existing scheme by
removing the requirement for time-bound investment and minimum lock-in-period
of funds. I am also harmonising the guidelines for registration of venture capital
activity with the Central Board of Direct Taxes, with those for registration with the

 22
Security and Exchange Board of India. This will ensure uniformity in norms for
registration with both the organisations. I am confident that these initiatives will
increase the attractiveness of the Venture Capital Scheme and induce high net-
worth investors to commit their funds to the ‘sunrise’ sectors, particularly, the
Information Technology Sector.
 95. Very recently, the Companies Act, 1956 has been amended to permit
transactions relating to buy- back of shares. There is some ambiguity in the
interpretation of the law as to whether such transactions would be treated as subject
to dividend tax in addition to capital gains tax. In view of this, I propose to amend
the law to put it beyond doubt that on buy-back of shares, the shareholders will not
be subject to dividend tax, and would only be liable to capital gains tax.
 96. Mr. Speaker, Sir, I wish to now turn to another area of special focus in this
budget, namely the Housing Sector. In regard to this sector, I propose a comprehensive
package of fiscal incentives focussed at:
 * the middle class investors wishing to purchase a dwelling unit;
 * the promoters of middle income housing projects; and
 * the housing finance companies.
 97. As the first element of this package, I propose that the interest on a loan for
a self-occupied property be exempted from tax up to a ceiling of Rs.75,000, increased
from the current ceiling of Rs.30,000. This concession will encourage middle class
investors to take loans to purchase modest dwelling units of their own.
 98. The second element of this incentive package relates to the scheme for
housing projects for enjoying a tax holiday under Section 80IA of the Income Tax
Act. The existing provision, inter-alia, requires that the built -up area of dwelling
units should not exceed 1000 sq. feet. There have been many representations that
in towns other than Mumbai and Delhi, the land cost is relatively less, and therefore,
for the same capital expenditure investors can afford to purchase dwelling units of
slightly larger areas. In view of this, it has been represented that the ceiling on built
-up areas for dwelling units in approved projects be increased from 1000 sq. ft to
1500 sq. ft at all locations except Mumbai and Delhi. I propose to accept this
suggestion and make suitable modifications in the law. This amendment in the scheme
for treating housing projects as infrastructure will, I believe, also give a significant
fillip to construction activities in the smaller towns.
 99. For the construction activity to pick up any significant degree of momentum,
it has to be ensured that housing finance companies stay financially viable. Currently,
such housing finance companies are subject to tax on interest on loans, on accrual
basis. In order to lessen the burden on such housing finance companies, I propose
to amend the law so that the income of such companies will be taxable on actual
basis, rather than accrual basis.
 1 0 0 . A significant number of individuals seeking accommodation in the major
cities are the employees of the business sector. I feel that it is necessary to encourage
the business sector to invest in housing for their employees so as to add to the net
housing stock. In this spirit, I propose to increase the depreciation rate from 20% to
40% on new dwelling units purchased by the business sector for its employees.

 23
 1 0 1 . This entire package of fiscal incentives for the housing construction sector
will, I believe, be a powerful force for revival of the entire economy. The construction
sector has very strong linkages with several other major sectors, notably steel and
cement. A general upsurge in construction activities will not only increase the
corpus of housing stock in the country, but will give a substantial fillip to industrial
activity.
 1 0 2 . Apprehensions have been expressed in certain quarters regarding the
incidence of a high level of Non Performing Assets (NPAs) in some of the banks. I am
of the view that the banks should make every effort to clean up their books and to
remove any misgivings, which may exist about the transparency of the accounts. To
assist in this direction, Mr. Speaker, Sir, I propose to make tax deductible such
amounts as are provided by banks as ‘doubtful debts’ subject to a maximum of 5%
of the such aggregate ‘doubtful debts’, in any one year. This concession will be
available for a period of 5 years for such ‘doubtful debts’ as are identified under the
prudential norms prescribed by the Reserve Bank of India.
 1 0 3 . I propose to amend the law so that tax concession will be available to a
loanee on interest payment to a co-operative bank on actual basis rather than accrual
basis. This proposal will induce the loanees to make timely repayment of their
interest liability in order to avail of the tax benefit, and correspondingly, the financial
condition of the co-operative banks can be expected to improve.
 1 0 4 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, I now turn to the proposals relating to the Infrastructure
and Industry sectors.
 * I propose to extend the fiscal incentives by way of the tax holiday under
 Section 80 IA of the Income Tax Act, to cold chains for agricultural produce.
 * The financial condition of most of State Electricity Boards is extremely
 precarious. Many of the State Electricity Boards wish to remedy the situation
 by unbundling generation, transmission and distribution activities to
 separate companies. I propose to treat the activities of transmission and
 distribution of power, set up after 1.4.1999, as eligible activities for fiscal
 incentives available to infrastructure units. I am sanguine that this proposal
 will facilitate the restructuring and rehabilitation of the State Electricity
 Boards.
 * Currently, the tax exemption given under Section 80 IA of the Income Tax
 Act to the infrastructure sector and other core sectors, has to be availed of
 within a given maximum period. This given maximum period has come to
 vary from sector to sector. In order to bring about uniformity, I propose the
 amendment of the Income Tax Act so as to provide a maximum period of 15
 years in which units can avail of the tax concessions offered to infrastructure
 and other core sector units.
 * Mr. Speaker, Sir, I am conscious of the fact that, despite all our
 announcements, the industrial development in North Eastern Region has
 not come up to our expectations. To give industrialisation a fillip in this
 area of the country, I propose a 10 year tax holiday for all industries set up
 in Growth Centres, Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporations,
 and for other specified industries, in the North Eastern Region. I would
 urge the industrial entrepreneurs from this part of the country to seize the

 24
 opportunity and set up modern, high value added manufacturing units in
 the region.
 1 0 5 . The Indian entertainment industry, which includes films, music and
television software is growing by leaps and bounds. I believe that with our creativity
and our talent, India has the potential to become a global media superpower. We
have done remarkably well in the field of computer software development and exports,
and the same can be achieved in the development and export entertainment industry
products, specially films, TV, software and music. With a view to facilitating India
becoming a super power in this sector, I am including a number of measures in the
budget. My aim is to give similar facilities and tax benefits to this sector as are
available to the export of goods and merchandise under section 80HHC.
 1 0 6 . Let me assure you that it would be our endeavour to support the
entertainment industry “Dil Se”, and I am sure that no longer would the industry
have to ask the government “Hum Apke Hain Kaun”?
 1 0 7 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, we are all conscious of the fact that the Information
Technology sector is going to be the sector of the future. The immediate crisis,
which is looming over this sector, is connected with the Y2K Problem, which will hit
us at the close of the current calendar year. I get the impression that the corporate
sector is not adequately seized of the dangers which lie ahead on account of this
problem. In these circumstances, to assist the business sector to overcome the Y2K
Problem, I propose that all expenditure incurred in making their systems Y2K
compliant be allowed as revenue expenditure in the next financial year. I urge the
business sector to avail of this concession and make every effort to remedy the
defect in their software systems, so that their valuable databases do not spin into
chaos.
 1 0 8 . Under the current law, a weighted deduction of 125% of the expenditure
made on in-house R&D is available to corporate houses up to 31.3.2000.
Representations have been received that this period is too short for any company to
plan its R&D programme. I propose to extend the concession for in-house R&D up to
31.3.2005. Further, I propose to extend a similar concession of permitting a weighted
deduction of 125% of expenditure for R&D Projects entrusted to research laboratories
and universities. In the globalised economy, the future is for those who are in the
vanguard of development of technology. In view of this, I would urge the corporate
sector to avail of this facility to the fullest extent.
 1 0 9 . In the last few years, the direct tax department has undertaken a concerted
drive to extend the national tax base. As a method of identifying potential taxpayers,
the “One by Six” scheme was extended to 35 cities in 1998-99. This Scheme has
given very satisfying results. Consequent upon the launching of this scheme, the
number of tax assessees has risen from 120 lakh to 140 lakh in the period of one
year. It is the assessment of the department that there is considerable scope for
further registration of tax assessees. In view of the favourable results of the scheme,
I now propose to extend this scheme to 19 more cities in the country having a
population of more than 5 lakh.
 1 1 0 . Since the last budget, the Income Tax department has undertaken a drive
for issue of PAN Numbers to the tax-paying applicants. The response of this scheme

 25
has been overwhelming, and we have received as many as 168 lakh applications.
The requisite PAN Numbers have already been issued to 75 lakh taxpayers and we
are confident that the remaining applications will be disposed in the next few months.
 1 1 1 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, I will now like to highlight the proposals which are targeted
at those sections of society which require Government’s special attention. First, I
propose that the deduction for medical insurance premia for senior citizens be raised
from the current level of Rs.10,000 to Rs.15,000 and tax deduction for treatment of
specific diseases be increased to Rs.60,000. Considering the fact that medical and
hospitalisation costs have risen and life expectancy has also improved, the general
insurance industry intends to increase the upper ceiling of the sum insured under
the mediclaim policy from the existing level of Rs.3 lakh to Rs.5 lakh, and the upper
age limit for coverage to 80 years from the existing 75 years. Second, I propose that
expenditure made in respect of hostel projects for working women be eligible for
deduction from taxable income under Section 35AC of the Income-Tax Act. Third, I
propose that pension received by the recipients of the different gallantry award
winners, and the family pension received by their heirs, be exempted from income
tax.
 1 1 2 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, I now submit my last proposal on direct taxes. I face the
difficult task of containing the revenue and fiscal deficits on the one hand, and on
the other meeting the growing development expenditure. I propose to fulfil this task
and also ensure equitable burden sharing. I am making a modest demand only on
those sections of our society who have the capacity to pay while exempting low-
income earners. With these considerations, I propose to impose an across-the-board
surcharge of 10% on Corporate Tax, and also a 10% surcharge on all other categories
of assessees. In respect of individuals and Hindu Undivided Families, the applicability
of the surcharge is limited to those having total income of Rs.60,000 or more. In
effect, this surcharge will mean an increase of a marginal 2% in the 20% slab & 3%
in the 30% slab. It would leave the rate in the 10% slab unchanged. This is in the
nature of a temporary surcharge. I trust that the House and our citizens will appreciate
the circumstances in which I have had to make this proposal.
 1 1 3 . To sum up, Mr. Speaker, Sir, as a result of the various proposals made in
this budget on the direct taxes, the estimated revenue in 1999-2000 would be
Rs.59,235 crore, including a component of net additional resource mobilisation of
Rs.3,100 crore.
 1 1 4 . I now have something to say on behalf of my colleague, the Minister of
Communications. Postal Service is highly employment intensive and salary &
allowances constitute a major part of the operating expenses of the Postal Department.
A revision of tariff for some postal services has, therefore, become unavoidable.
However, in the interest of the common man and the role of the postal services in
easy dissemination of news and information there will be no change in the tariff for
Postcard, Money orders, Book packets containing printed books and Registered
newspapers. However, the rate of Printed Postcard is being raised from Rs.1.50 to
Rs.2.00, of Competition Postcard from Rs.3.00 to Rs.4.00, of Inland letter from Rs.1.50
to Rs.2.00, of Book pattern and sample packets from Re.1.00 to Rs.2.00 for first 50
grams or part thereof and from Rs.2.00 to Rs.3.00 for every additional 50 grams or

 26
part thereof, and Parcels from Rs.10.00 to Rs.12.00 for a weight not exceeding 500
grams or part thereof and from Rs.10.00 to Rs.15.00 for every additional 500 grams
or part thereof. There are also certain other changes, which are explained in the
Memorandum circulated along with the budget documents. The changes would take
effect from a date to be notified after the Finance Bill is passed. The revisions proposed
are estimated to yield additional revenue of about Rs.145 crore in a full year and
about Rs.121 crore during 1999-2000. Even this modest increase which is necessary
for sustaining postal development, will only partially meet the cost of various services.
 1 1 5 . As a result of the postal tariff revision, total expenditure of the Central
Government for the year 1999-2000 would be marginally reduced to Rs.2,83,882
crore while with my tax and other proposals, net revenue receipts and non-debt
capital receipts would increase to Rs.2,03,927 crore. The revenue deficit is placed
at Rs.54,147 crore, while the fiscal deficit is placed at Rs.79,955 crore. This amounts
to 2.7% and 4.0% respectively on the basis of the new series of GDP announced by
Central Statistical Organisation and after excluding the payment of the share of
small savings collection to State Governments. Based on the old series of GDP and
excluding the payment of the share of small savings collection to State Governments,
the percentage works out to 3.0% and 4.4% respectively.
 1 1 6 . With the Budget for 1999-2000, we will have set in motion a medium-term
strategy for restoring the fiscal health of our economy. This budget proposes to
reduce the revenue and fiscal deficits by 0.7% and 0.6% of GDP, respectively. At this
rate of reduction, the revenue deficit will be eliminated in 4 years and the fiscal
deficit will have declined below 2% of GDP. The budget proposes major reform of our
excise taxes. In the medium-term we will move to a single rate and a full-fledged VAT
system. Our customs duty structure will be phased down to Asian levels in 5 years.
During this period Indian industry will have restructured and become fully competitive
in world markets. Our knowledge-based industries will generate lakhs of jobs. The
gains from competition and productivity growth will drive our exports to new heights.
Over the same period our physical and human infrastructure will be raised close to
world class. Above all, the basic needs of all our people for food, shelter, health,
education and employment will be met within a decade from now.
 1 1 7 . These achievements will transform India into a genuine economic super
power by the year 2020. The twenty-first century belongs to us.
 1 1 8 . In the words of the Prime Minister Shri Atal Behari Vajpayee -
 +ÉÉÄJÉÉå àÉå ´Éè£É´É BÉEä ºÉ{ÉxÉä,
 {ÉMÉ àÉå iÉÚ{ÉEÉxÉÉå BÉEÉÒ MÉÉÊiÉ cÉä,
 ®É-]Å£ÉÉÎBÉDiÉ BÉEÉ V´ÉÉ® xÉ âóBÉEiÉÉ,
 +ÉÉA ÉÊVÉºÉ-ÉÊVÉºÉ BÉEÉÒ ÉÊcààÉiÉ cÉä**
 With dreams of prosperity and marching at a stormy pace, the tide of patriotism
will not recede. Let the courageous come forward to join me.
 1 1 9 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, with these words, I commend the budget to this august
House.

