 PART B
 71. Income-tax and other direct taxes are important instruments for raising
resources and reducing disparities. We propose to achieve these objectives by plugging
of legal loopholes and effective administration rather than by enhancement of rates
which often leads to tax evasion and generation of black money. My proposals are
also designed to further our Party’s avowed policy of affording relief to the middle
classes in these difficult times.
 72. Hon’ble Members will recall thdt last year the exemption limit, for income-
tax on personal incomes was raised to Rs.12, 000. But the nil slab rate was retained at
Rs.8,000. The House will be glad to know that I propose to raise the exemption limit
for income-tax in the case of non-corporate taxpayers other than registered firms and
Hindu undivided families with one or more members having separate income exceeding
the exemption limit, from Rs.12,000 to Rs.15,000. With a view to providing significant
relief to middle income groups, 1 further propose to raise the nil rate slab from Rs.8.000
to Rs.15,000 and also restructure the rate schedule up to Rs.30,000. The rate of income-
tax on the slab of Rs.15,001 to Rs.25,000 will be 30 per cent and on the slab of
Rs.25,001 to Rs.30,000, 34 per cent. The rates of income-tax on higher slabs will
remain unchanged. As a result of these changes, about 14 lakhs of taxpayers will go
out of the income tax net. I venture to claim that never have so many people been
freed from the burden of income taxation at one stroke. Apart from this, another 11.5
lakhs of taxpayers in the income brackets of Rs.15,001 to Rs.30,000 will also get
varying degrees of relief. The reduction in the tax liebility at income level of Rs.15,000
will be Rs.990; at Rs.20,000, Rs.495 and at Rs.25,000, Rs.220. There will be no
change in the tax liability in the case of taxpayers having income exceeding Rs.30,000.
Thus I have provided in me year income-tax exemption and /or reduction to over 25
lakhs of income-tax assessees out of about 40 lakhs of assessees in the country.
 73. At present, salaried taxpayers are entitled to a standard deduction in an
amount equal per cent of the salary upto Rs.10,000 and 10 per cent of the balance
subject to an overall ceiling limit of Rs.3,500. These limits were fixed in 1974. In
view of the subsequent rise in prices, and as a means of relief to salaried taxpayers, I
propose to enhance the rate of standard deduction to 20 per cent subject to a higher
ceiling of Rs.5,000. Hon’ble Members will be happy to know that this benefit will be
 13

applicable to pensioners also. At present, employees in receipt of conveyance allowance
are entitled to a standard deduction of Rs.1,000 only. It is now proposed that they
should be given the benefit of full standard deduction.
 74. In view of the urgent need to raise the level of savings in the economy, 1
propose to continue the Compulsory Deposit Scheme for income-tax Payers for another
two years.
 75. The corporate sector has a crucial role to play in the growth of the national
economy. I have earlier in my speech referred to the various steps taken for improving
the climate for investment in industry. I now propose to reduce by 5 per cent the
surcharge on income-tax payable by all classes of companies i.e. from 7.5 per cent to
2.5 per cent. This will add to the internal availability of funds in the corporate sector
and should improve the scope for investment financing from their own resources. This
step will reinforce the impact of the measured-which I have indicated earlier for
mobilising financial resources for industrial investment.
 76. As Hon’ble Members are aware, all categories of-tax-payers are required
to pay advance tax m pay-as-you-earn basis. Surtax is, however, not payable by
companies in advance. I propose to remove this anomaly and provide that surtax
will also be payable in advance during the financial year preceding the relevant
assessment year.
 77. The Eleventh Schedule to the income-tax Act contains a list of industries
which do not qualify for specified investment related tax concessions under the
income-tax Act. For example, investment allowance or tax holiday is not admissible
in respect of these industries unless they are in the small-scale sector. Industries
included in this Schedule were originally considered to be of low priority. However,
on reviewing the list, I do not find any justification for treating many of the listed
industries as of low priority. Accordingly, 14 groups of industries will be removed
from this Schedule and will now become eligible for the specified tax concessions.
These industries include electric fans, pressure cookers, glass and glassware,
pigments, colours, paints, enamels, varnishes, blacks and cellulose lacquers,
chinaware and porcelainware, mosaic tiles and glazed tiles, synthetic detergents,
amplifiers or any other apparatus used for addressing the public, vacuum flasks and
other vacuum vessels, etc. These industries, some of which have export potential,
will now become eligible for the specified tax concessions.
 78. Hon’ble Members will recall that the Government had taken several
measures last year to curb the use of private discretionary trusts as a device for tax
avoidance. Another tax avoidance device that has come to the notice of the Government
is the creation of oral trust. With a view to checking this abuse, I propose to subject
oral trusts to income-tax at the maximum marginal rate and to wealth-tax at the flat
rate of 3 per cent or at the appropriate rate applicable in the case of an individual,
whichever course is more beneficial to the revenue. This proposal will take effect
from the assessment year 1981-82.
 14

 79. Another device being used for avoiding proper tax liability is the
creation of associations of persons without defining the shares of members. This
enables the creation of a large number of taxable entities which, under the existing
law, will be chargeable to income-tax separately. I now propose that such
associations of persons be charged to income-tax at the maximum marginal rate
and to wealth-tax at the flat rate of 3 per cent or at the appropriate rate applicable
in the case of an individual, whichever is higher. This proposal will also take
effect from the assessment year 1981-82.
 80. Earlier in my speech, I have referred to the prospective participation of
foreign companies in the field of oil exploration and production. In this connection, it
is necessary to take several steps relating to tax matters. Firstly, it is proposed to
extend. the income-tax Act and the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act to the off-shore
areas. Secondly, it is proposed to insert suitable provisions in the income-tax Act and
the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act to enable the Central Government to provide, by
a notification in the Official Gazette for an exemption, reduction in rate or other
modification in respect of income-tax or surtax in favour of any class of persons
engaged in the business of mineral oils and gas in association with the Central
Government or any person authorised by it. Notifications under the new provisions
when made will be placed on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament. It is also
proposed to amend section 42 of the income-tax Act relating to special provision for
deductions in the case of business of the prospecting for or extraction or production of
mineral oils so as to extend its scope to cover cases where the Government itself does
not participate in such business but does so through any person authorised by it.
 81. While the search for additional quantities of oil should continue with
unabated vigour, there is also an urgent need to accelerate the development and use of
renewable energy resources and to promote their utilisation. The renewable energy
sources which have already been brought to the threshold of commercial use by our
scientists and engineers include solar, biomass and wind energy. Some fiscal incentives
to promote use of these non-conventional forms of energy are called for. I, therefore,
propose to enhance the depreciation allowance on machinery or plant installed for
manufacturing renewable energy devices and systems from 10 per cent available at
present to 30 per cent. Depreciation on renewable energy devices and systems used
for business or profession will also be allowed at the enhanced rate. Other measures
under contemplation by the Government include long to the relevant industries on
suitable terms from financial institutions and exemption from certain taxes and duties.
 82. 1 had earlier in my speech referred to the imperative need to promote our
exports in view of our difficult balance of payments situation. To encourage
establishment of export-oriented industries in the Free Trade Zone, the Government
proposes to allow complete tax holiday in respect of units set up in these Zones for an
initial period of five years in lieu of other concessions.

 15

 83. Tea is one of our important export-oriented industries. At present,
development allowance equal to 50 per cent of the expenditure incurred on plantation
of tea bushes in-any new area or on any land which has been previously abandoned is
allowed in computing the income from tea business. For this purpose, the expenditure
qualifying for development allowance is restricted to Rs.12,500 per hectare of land
situated in hilly areas and Rs.10,000 per hectare in other areas. Having regard to the
increase in the cost of planting in recent years, I propose to raise these ceiling limits
to Rs.40,000 per hectare of land situated in Darjeeling district, Rs.35,000 per hectare
in respect of land situated in other hilly areas and Rs.30,000 per hectare in plains.
 84. Under section 35B of the income tax Act, domestic companies and non-
corporate taxpayers resident in India are entitled to a weighted deduction in the
computation of the taxable profits at the rate of one and one-third times the amount of
qualifying expenditure incurred by them on development of export markets. The scope
of this provision was curtailed last year as it had been misused for claiming a weighted
deduction in respect of expenditure incurred in India on activities which had no direct
relation with the basic objective of development of export markets. In order to guard
against such misuse, while at the same time protecting all legitimate effort at export
market development, the Government is framing rules which will identify a number of
specific activities to be allowed under section 35B. The necessary notification in this
behalf will be issued shortly.
 85. Electronics is both a labour-intensive and export-oriented industry. I,
therefore, propose to include the electronic component industry in the Ninth Schedule
to the income-tax Act and provide that dividends derived by a domestic company from
an Indian company engaged exclusively in the manufacture of electronic components
will be completely exempt from income-tax.
 86. The small-scale industrial undertakings enjoy certain tax concessions under
the income tax Act. For this purpose, an industrial undertaking is regarded as a small-
scale industrial undertaking if the aggregate value of the machinery and plant installed
therein as on the last day of the previous year does not exceed Rs.10 lakhs. I now
propose to raise this limit to Rs.20 lakhs in line with the new definition of a small-
scale industry.
 87. Under the existing law, in computing taxable income, a deduction equal
to 20 per cent of the profits and gains derived from the business of publication of
books is allowed. I propose to extend this concession for a period of five years with
effect from assessment year 1981-82.
 88. At present, approved financial corporations and public housing finance
companies are entitled to a deduction in respect of the specified percentage of income
carried to special reserve, subject to certain conditions. The aggregate of the amounts
qualifying for such deduction is, however, subject to an overall ceiling equal to the
 16

amount of the paid-up share capital. In order to enable such corporations and companies
to build-up such reserves further, I propose to double the present ceiling.
 89. Under the existing law, resident individuals and Hindu undivided families
are entitled to a deduction in respect of medical treatment of physically or mentally
handicapped dependants. I propose to double the amount of this deduction to Rs.4,800
in respect of a dependant who is hospitalised for a period of 182 days or more during
the relevant accounting year and Rs.1,200 in other cases. The House will doubtless
welcome this concession being given in the international Year for the Disabled Persons.
 90. I propose to give some significant concessions under the Estate Duty Act.
The present limit of Rs.50,000 for estate duty was fixed in 1958. I propose to raise it
to Rs.1.5 lakhs the same as under the Wealth-tax Act. I also propose to provide that
one residential house or part thereof will be valued for estate duty purposes on the
same basis as for the purposes of wealth tax. Since the Estate Duty Act can be amended
only with the concurrence of State Legislatures, a Bill for giving effect to these proposals
will be introduced later.
 91. I propose to make certain amendments in the income-tax Act to upgrade
the qualifications for appointment as members of the income-tax Appellate Tribunal.
 92. Other amendments to the direct tax laws are of minor significance. I would
not like to take up the time of the House by referring to them in detail here.
 93. The reduction in the rates and other concessions in respect of income tax
on personal incomes would result in a loss of Rs.146 crores in a full year and Rs.115
crores during 1981-82. Having regard to the pattern of sharing of income-tax between
Centre and States, these concessions will entail a loss of revenue of Rs.29 crores to
the Centre in 1981-82. The loss of revenue on account of reduction in the rates of
corporation tax and other concessions to companies will largely be balanced by the
payment of surtax in advance by companies. I am, therefore, not assuming any loss of
revenue on this score for 1981-82.
 94. I now turn to my proposals on indirect taxes. My basic approach is that
additional revenue should flow largely from increased production. However, there is
need to mobilise additional resources to finance the Sixth Plan. While seeking to raise
additional resources I have nevertheless kept in mind the imperative need to avoid
hardship to the middle and poorer sections of consumers and to provide a larger
measure of relief to the small-scale sector of our industry.
 95. Taking Customs duties first, my principal proposal relates to auxiliary
duties of customs. This duty has been levied on an annual basis since the 1973 Budget.
While continuing this levy I also propose to raise the rates of auxiliary duties as a
measure of additional resource mobilisation. In recent years we have been following
a fairly liberal import policy. The difficult balance of payments outlook points to the
need for conserving foreign exchange. The tariff mechanism judiciously used, can
 17

help conserve foreign exchange and also raise some revenue. I, therefore, propose to
increase the rates of auxiliary duties by 5 per cent ad valorem, on all categories of
imports with a few well-merited exceptions. This will obviate a sharp increase in the
landed cost of any particular article.
 96. Auxiliary duties of customs are now leviable on imported goods broadly
on a three-tier basis. Items subject to a basic duty upto 60 per cent ad valorem, for
example, basic raw materials, bear an auxiliary duty of 5 per cent ad valorem; on
items such as semi-processed goods and intermediates, where the rate of basic duty is
60 per cent ad valorem or above but less than 100 per cent, the rate of auxiliary duty
is 15 per cent ad valorem; and where the rate of basic duty is 100 per cent ad valorem
or above such as on finished consumer goods, the rate of auxiliary duty is 20 per cent
ad valorem. In other cases the rate of auxiliary duty is 5 per cent ad valorem, except
crude petroleum on which the rate is Rs.9.50 per metric tonne. There are also some
items which are fully exempt from auxiliary duty. My proposal is to increase the rate
of auxiliary duty to 10 per cent ad valorem wherever the rate of auxiliary duty is now
5 per cent; to 20 per cent ad valorem wherever is now 15 per cent; and to 25 per cent
ad valorem wherever the rate is now 20 per cent. I do not, however, propose to increase
the auxiliary duty on crude petroleum.
 97. In line with the approach I have explained, I propose to withdraw the
present full exemption from auxiliary duties of customs in respect of certain items of
capital equipment and subject them to auxiliary duty of customs at the rate of 5 per
cent ad valorem. This increase would cover, among other things, imports of machinery
as project imports as also items of machinery on which the concessional rate of 25 per
cent ad valorem is applied. This measure would, apart from yielding additional revenue,
afford some additional protection to the indigenous machine building industry which
has, of late, had to face a significant escalation in input costs
 98. I said earlier that I would exclude some items from the proposed increase
in the auxiliary duties of customs imports of essential items like-edible oil will be
exempted from the proposed increase. Bulk petroleum products such as kerosene and
high speed diesel oil and steel imported for buffer stock operations will also not
attract the increased levy. Items on which import duty rates have been changed in the
recent past with a view to maintaining parity with prices of domestic products have
also been kept out of the purview of the increased levy. Further keeping in view our
commitments under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. I propose to give up
the auxiliary duty in respect of three items involving a small revenue sacrifice. Further
details of the proposals are available in the Budget Papers.
 99. These proposals are expected to yield an additional revenue of about
Rs.250 crores.
 100. My next proposal relates to levy of import duty on newsprint. At present

 18

this item is fully exempt. There is a large foreign exchange outgo on imports of
newsprint. There is no reason why this commodity should not bear a moderate rate of
customs duty. I, therefore, propose to impose an effective customs duty of 15 per cent
ad valorem on imported newsprint. I expect this measure to yield an additional revenue
of about Rs.21crores.
 101. Imports of stainless steel bars and wire rods now attract a duty of 75 per
cent because they have industrial applications. But there is reason to believe that some
of these imports are being diverted for rerolling into strips and sheets used in the
manufacture of utensils. I, there fore, propose to raise the effective customs duty on
stainless steel bars and wire rods from 75 per cent to 175 per cent ad valorem. I have,
however, taken care to see that this increase does not affect imports of stainless steel
wire rods which are used for the drawing of wires. This measure is expected to yield
an additional revenue of Rs.5 crores.
 102. I also propose to raise the basic customs duty on plain shaft bearings
from 60 per cent to 100 per cent ad valorem. This increase should help to restrict
large scale imports of bearings such as thin-walled -bearings, which have been affecting
the indigenous industry. This proposal is expected to yield an additional revenue of
Rs.2.75 crores. On similar considerations it is proposed to raise the basic customs
duty on computers and computer peripherals from 40 per cent to 50 per cent ad
valorem. The likely revenue gain from this increase would be Rs.1 crore.
 103. I will now come to excise duties. The House will recall that in 1978 the
Additional Excise Duties (Textiles and Textile Articles) Act was passed, in terms of
which an additional duty of excise was levied on certain textiles and textile articles
at 10 per cent of the basic excise duty leviable. The revenue from this excise levy
was intended to meet the expenditure incurred by way of subsidy on controlled
cloth. The production of controlled cloth is being stepped up, with emphasis on
larger production of dhotis and sarees which are of special significance to the poorer
sections of society, particularly in rural areas. As a result, the provision for subsidy
under this scheme would rise to nearly Rs.100 crores in the coming year. The revenue
at the existing rate of additional excise duty is only about Rs.66 crores. I, therefore,
propose to raise the rate of additional excise duty from 10 per cent to 15 per cent of
the basic excise duty on all the items which are now covered by the levy. This would
yield an additional amount of about Rs.33 crores and help finance the increased
outlay on controlled cloth.
 104. As regards special excise duties, I propose only to continue them at the
existing rates. The exemptions in force are also being continued.
 105. My remaining proposals under Union excise duties are mainly designed
to achieve simplification and greater clarity.


 19

 106. Hon’ble Members would be aware that there is a graded structure of duty
on matches, the mechanised sector paying Rs.7.20 per gross boxes, the middle sector
paying Rs.4.50 and the cottage sector Rs.1.60. In the light of the report of the Dandekar
Committee and a special study made by the Government, it has become necessary to
discourage a tendency of middle sector units towards mechanisation of certain labour-
intensive processes. Accordingly, I propose that the concessional rates of duty i.e.
Rs.4.50 for middle sector units and Rs.1.60 for cottage units, will not be available if
pawer is used in the labour-intensive processes of frame-filling, dipping splints in
match composition, box making, box filling, labelling and bande rolling and packaging
if such units use power for any of the above processes, they will be liable to a duty
rate of Rs.5.50 per gross boxes, which would be intermediate between the rate. of
Rs.7.20 applicable to the fully mechanised sector and Rs.4. 50 now applicable to the
non-mechanised middle sector. I would like to stress that this is not intended as a
revenue measure. It is intended only to protect through the excise mechanism, the
employment potential of the non-mechanised sector’.
 107. With a view to preventing the possible infiltration of the middle sector
into the cottage sector and in order to ensure that the benefit of the lowest rate of duty
accrues to genuine cottage sector units, it is Proposed to reimpose a ceiling on the
clearances by cottage sector units at concessional rates. The new ceiling, which is
proposed to be fixed at 120 million matches per unit per annum, is much more liberal
than the ceiling of 75 million that existed prior to the 1980 Budget. The pattern of
production and clearance will be kept under watch and this ceiling will be reviewed if
circumstances so warrant. The changes I have proposed are fair to all segments of the
industry and are designed to promote both employment and production in the best
possible manner.
 108. Another rationalisation measure relates to the concession available to
manufacturers of goods falling under Tariff Item 68, who undertake work on ‘job’
basis. Under the present scheme duty is being effectively collected only on the ‘job
charges’ paid by the principal manufacturer to the job worker. In the operation of the
scheme, however, several difficulties have been experienced, particularly on the question
of what is ‘job work’. There have been cases where some manufacturers have taken
undue advantage of the concession. I, therefore, propose to replace the present scheme
by me in which, instead of levying duty separately on the job charges paid to the job
worker, the duty will be paid by the principal manufacturer on the value of the finished
goods. This step should be generally welcomed by ancillary units which undertake
work on job basis.
 109. I also propose to rationalise the Central Excise tariff entry and the rate
structure relating to tyres with a view to making the legislative intent clearer and
minimising the scope for disputes in classification and assessment, particularly in
regard to off-the-road tyres used in bulldozers, scrappers and other earth moving
equipments. While proposing the necessary amendments, I have taken care to maintain
 20

the existing rates of duties and duty concessions in respect of tyres both for agricultural
tractors and their trailers.
 110. The other major area where rationalisation of the tariff entries has been
proposed is in regard to non-ferrous metals under the respective entries in the Central
Excise Tariff. There has been considerable debate and dispute m the question of
assessment of waste and scrap of these metals. To set these at rest it is proposed to
specifically cover waste and scrap of these metals under the respective tariff entries.
 111. In addition to the above, a few other amendments to certain tariff entries
as also the insertion of a separate tariff item for polyester film have been proposed.
The details of these changes may be seen from the Budget papers.
 112. I now turn to a proposal which seeks to fulfil a long-standing demand of
State Governments. The scheme of levy of additional excise duty in lieu of sales-tax
is at present applicable to sugar, tobacco and some textile items. The National
Development Council had recommended that the revenue yield from Central excise
duties and additional excise duties be in the ratio of 2:1 as far as possible. At a
Conference of Chief Ministers, I gave an assurance that an effort would be made to
achieve this ratio in respect of these commodities as a whole.
 113. I have considered how best this assurance can be fulfilled. The simplest
solution will be to make a change in the ratio for sharing of revenues from cigarettes
as between the Centre and the States. As against the present ratio of 76:24 between;
basic excise duty and additional excise duty in the composite rate applicable to
cigarettes, the ratio is proposed to be changed to 72.5:27.5. This will be combined
with a uniform increase in the specific duty element in the ‘composite rate from
Rs.21.00 to Rs.21.25 per thousand. The overall revenue from cigarettes will remain
practically unchanged. There should, therefore, be no justification for manufacturers
to mark up the prices of cigarettes. With these changes, the overall ratio between the
yields from basic and special excise duties m the me hand and additional excise duties
m the other is expected to improve to 2:1 taking the three items sugar tobacco and
textiles together. This will result in a transfer of about Rs.21.72 crores from revenues
under Central excise to the revenue under additional excise duty.
 114. I have also a minor proposal which is basically of interest to the State
Governments. Under the Medicinal and Toilet Preparations Act, 1959, excise duties
are leviable m medicines and toilet preparations which contain alcohol, narcotics and
narcotic drugs. Certain changes have been proposed in the Act with a view to effecting
a switch over to the metric system and also to eliminate avoidance of duty in certain
cases. The changes proposed, however, have very little revenue significance.
 115. I shall now turn to concessions in the area of indirect taxes. This
Government is committed to the pursuit of a vigorous policy of promoting small scale
industry in the interest both of employment and broader development of
 21

entrepreneurship. Accordingly, I propose to increase the duty exemption limit under
the general scheme of excise duty concessions applicable to 72 excisable commodities
from Rs.5 lakhs in terms of value of clearances to Rs.7.5 lakhs. Clearances in excess
of Rs.7.5 lakhs will continue to benefit from the existing concessional duty limited to
three fourths of the applicable rates of excise duty up to a clearance of Rs.15 lakhs in
a financial year as at present. This measure should benefit a substantial number of
small manufacturers and enable them to compete more effectively with large units. I
am sure that all sections of the House will welcome this enlargement of the scheme of
concessions enjoyed by small scale industry.
 116. Under the excise duty concessions available at present to small
manufacturers of some products, notably Item 68 goods and specified electronic goods,
one of the criteria for eligibility is the value of investment in plant and machinery. I
propose to increase the eligibility limit of such investment from the present figure of
Rs.10 lakhs to Rs.20 lakhs, in line with the revised definition of ‘small scale units’
under the new industrial Policy. Here again I am confident that my proposal will be
welcomed by all the Hon’ble Members.
 117. In the last Budget I had announced wide ranging duty concessions with a
view to encouraging the development of the electronics industry. As a further step in
this direction, I propose to extend the scope of the import duty concessions so as to
cover 59 new items of capital equipment and 23 new items of raw materials and
components used by the electronics industry.
 118. At present, the handloom sector of the woollen industry does not enjoy
any special duty concessions. This sector has a good growth potential. I, therefore,
propose to reduce substantially the processing stage duty on woollen fabrics produced
on handlooms on the lines of the concessions which are available to cotton fabrics
produced on handlooms.
 119. I also propose to extend the concessional import duty of 25 per cent ad
valorem to a few more important drug intermediates. This step should induce indigenous
manufacturers to go in for production of more basic drugs.
 120. Last year, I had fully exempted cotton and cotton-viscose blend hosiery
from excise duty. I now propose to extend this exemption to all hosiery articles falling
under Item 68 of the Central Excise Tariff.
 121. Another duty concession relates to ‘flocked’ fabrics where the excise duty
is being reduced from the present level of the base fabric duty plus 30 per cent ad
valorem to the base fabric duty plus 15 per cent ad valorem on the consideration that
the present duty burden is heavier than warranted, particularly on flock-printed fabrics.
Further, on colour scanners for the printing industry, the basic customs duty is being
reduced from 100 per cent ad valorem to 60 per cent ad valorem.
 122. In this international Year of the Disabled, it is fitting that appropriate tax
 22

relief measures should be extended to our handicapped brethern. Artificial limbs and
rehabilitation aids for the handicapped are already exempted from Central excise duty
under Item 68. I now propose to exempt fully from excise duty Braille watches for the
use of the blind.
 123. I also propose to exempt from excise duty Braille paper which is necessary
for printing books for use by the blind.
 124. I further propose to substantially reduce the customs duty on hearing aids
and Braille watches imported for personal use by post or air.
 125. The increased levy of auxiliary duties of customs to which I have earlier
referred will not be applied to goods such as orthopaedic appliances, Braille watches
and parts, tricycles for the crippled, hearing aids and, parts. I am sure that this House
will wholeheartedly endorse these proposals.
 126. The various concessions and reliefs in excise and customs duties which I
have announced will entail a sacrifice of revenue of Rs.9.35 crores in a full year.
 127. My taxation proposals will yield a sum of about Rs.35.57 crores in a full
year by way of excise duties and Rs.285. 00 crores by way of customs duties. The
concessions I have announced add up to Rs.7.05 crores on the excise side and Rs.2.30
crores on the customs side. The net yield is, therefore, Rs.28.52 crores from excise
duties and Rs.282.70 crores from customs duties. The accrual to the Central Exchequer
in a full year will be Ra. 300.50 crores.
 128. I hope it would not have escaped the notice of Hon’ble Members that this
is perhaps the first Budget in recent years in which no increase has been effected in
excise duties for raising general revenues.
 129. I would now like to say a few words on behalf of my Hon’ble colleague,
the Minister of Communications. A substantial programme of development of
telecommunication facilities is envisaged during the Sixth Five Year Plan. It is, therefore,
appropriate that the Department should generate internal resources to a reasonable
extent for financing its Plan. The additional dearness allowance sanctioned to employees
and other increases in the cost of operations have already eroded the existing surplus
of the Department. It has, therefore, become necessary to revise certain
telecommunication tariffs. At present the rate of telephone call charge in measured
rate telephone system is 30 paise per call unit for calls exceeding 250 but not more
than 1750 in a quarter. It is proposed to increase this charge to 40 paise per call unit.
The manual trunk can charges for calls of ordinary category for a unit period of 3
minutes in the distance slabs of 100 to 200 kilometres are being increased from Rs.6
to Rs.8 and in the distance slab of 200 to 500 kilometres from Rs.10 to Ra.12. These
measures are estimated to yield Rs.35.78 crores in a full year. The additional revenue
during 1981- 82 will be of the order of Rs.20 crores and has been taken into account
in estimating the receipts of Posts and Telegraphs. It is also proposed to increase the

 23

rates of deposits for telephone connections under ‘Own Your Telephone’ system. This
revision will yield about Rs.5 crores to the Government by way of additional deposits
in 1981-82. The details of these revisions are shown in a memorandum which is being
circulated along with the Budget papers. The changes will be given effect to from a
date to be notified after the Finance Bill is passed by Parliament. There will be no
change in either postal or telegraph rates.
 130. I had earlier stated that the resources gap estimated at existing rates of
taxation is Rs.1810 crores. The various tax measures I have presented, together with
the reliefs offered, will yield net additional revenue of Rs.271 crores to the Centre.
This leaves an uncovered deficit of Rs.1539 crores. This deficit may appear large, but
taking a total view of the economic situation I believe it is within the limits of fiscal
prudence. The inflationary potential of the Budget must be viewed in the context of
the full package of policy measures which I have outlined. This package contains
many incentives for higher production and increased utilisation of capacity. This should
stimulate a considerable supply response during the coming year and as I have
mentioned, signs of this upturn are already evident. I attach great importance to
expanded supplies as the critical element in keeping inflationary pressures in check.
The package also contains important incentives to savings which will undoubtedly
help in this regard. Furthermore, monetary and credit policies will be so designed as
to ensure that Government recourse to deficit financing takes place within a balanced
and measured overall expansion of credit in the system.
 131. Mr. Speaker, Sir, the economic situation remains difficult and yet full of
great opportunities for development and growth. I have tried to present a Budget
which gives maximum support to forces that can move us forward on the path of
growth with stability and social justice. It sets the stage for all of us to work towards
the achievement of our economic and social goals so clearly laid out in the Sixth Plan.
Economic policy can only do this much. Hard work, discipline and the innate good
sense of the people of this ancient land must do the rest.
 132. Sir I commend this Budget to the House.
 (FEBRUARY 28, 1981)




 24

