 Part B
 VIII. Tax Proposals
Madam Speaker,
 I now come to Part B of my proposals.
135. The life of a Finance Minister is not easy. Various players, including
policy makers, politicians, agriculturists and business houses, participate in the
making of the economy. When everything goes well with the economy, we all
share in the joy. However, when things go wrong, it is the Finance Minister who
is called upon to administer the medicine. Economic policy, as in medical
treatment, often requires us to do something, which, in the short run, may be
painful, but is good for us in the long run. As Hamlet, the Prince of Denmark,
had said in Shakespeare’s immortal words, “I must be cruel only to be kind.”
 With this reminder, let me now turn to the tax proposals.
136. Last year, I had set the compass for movement towards the DTC in Direct
Taxes and GST in Indirect Taxes. My tax proposals for fiscal year 2012-13 mark
further progress in that direction.

Direct Taxes
 I shall now deal with direct taxes.
137. Last year I provided relief to individual taxpayers by enhancing the
exemption limit as a move towards DTC rates. Although DTC will not be
effective from this year, I propose to introduce the DTC rates for personal income
tax. I propose to enhance the exemption limit for the general category of
individual taxpayers from `1,80,000 to `2,00,000. This measure will provide
tax relief upto `2,000 to every taxpayer of this category. I also propose to raise
the upper limit of the 20 per cent tax slab from `8 lakh to `10 lakh. The proposed
personal income tax slabs are:
 Income upto `2 lakh Nil
 Income above `2 lakh and upto `5 lakh 10 per cent
 Income above `5 lakh and upto `10 lakh 20 per cent
 Income above `10 lakh 30 per cent
 These changes will provide substantial relief to taxpayers.
138. I propose to allow individual taxpayers, a deduction of upto `10,000
for interest from savings bank accounts. This would help a large number of
small taxpayers with salary incomes upto `5 lakh and interest from savings
bank accounts up to ` 10,000, as they would not be required to file income tax
returns.

http://indiabudget.nic.in

 25
139. Within the existing limit for deduction allowed for health insurance,
I propose to allow a deduction of upto `5,000 for preventive health check-up.
140. Senior citizens who do not have any income from business are proposed
to be exempted from the payment of advance tax. This will reduce their
compliance burden.
141. In the case of corporates, I am not proposing any change in the tax rates.
However, I propose certain measures to allow corporates to access lower cost
funds and to promote higher level of investments in several sectors.
142. In order to provide low cost funds to some stressed infrastructure sectors,
the rate of withholding tax on interest payments on external commercial
borrowings is proposed to be reduced from 20 per cent to 5 per cent for three
years. These sectors are:
 • power;
 • airlines;
 • roads and bridges;
 • ports and shipyards;
 • affordable housing;
 • fertilizer; and
 • dams
143. The restriction on Venture Capital Funds to invest only in nine specified
sectors is proposed to be removed. It is further proposed to remove the cascading
effect of Dividend Distribution Tax (DDT) in a multi-tier corporate structure. I
also propose to continue to allow repatriation of dividends from foreign
subsidiaries of Indian companies to India at a lower tax rate of 15 per cent as
against the tax rate of 30 per cent for one more year i.e. upto March 31, 2013.
144. Investment linked deduction of capital expenditure incurred in the
following businesses is proposed to be provided at the enhanced rate of 150 per
cent, as against the current rate of 100 per cent.
 • Cold chain facility
 • Warehouses for storage of food grains
 • Hospitals
 • Fertilisers
 • Affordable housing
145. The following new sectors are proposed to be added for the purposes of
investment linked deduction:
 • bee keeping and production of honey and beeswax
 • container freight station and inland container depots
 • warehousing for storage of sugar
http://indiabudget.nic.in

 26
146. To promote investment in research and development, it is proposed to
extend the weighted deduction of 200 per cent for R&D expenditure in an
in-house facility beyond March 31, 2012 for a further period of five years.
147. I also propose to provide weighted deduction of 150 per cent on
expenditure incurred for agri-extension services in order to facilitate growth in
the agriculture sector.
148. For the power sector, besides access to low cost funds as outlined above,
I also propose extension of the sunset date by one year for power sector
undertakings so that they can be set up on or before March 31, 2013 for claiming
100 per cent deduction of profits for 10 years. Additional depreciation of 20 per
cent in the initial year is proposed to be extended to new assets acquired by
power generation companies.
149. For SMEs, the turnover limit for compulsory tax audit of accounts as
well as for presumptive taxation is proposed to be raised from `60 lakh to
` 1 crore.

150. In order to augment funds for SMEs, I propose to exempt capital gains
tax on sale of a residential property, if the sale consideration is used for
subscription in equity of a manufacturing SME company for purchase of new
plant and machinery.
151. Considering the shortage of skilled manpower in the manufacturing sector
and to generate employment, I propose to provide weighted deduction at the rate
of 150 per cent of expenditure incurred on skill development in manufacturing
sector in accordance with specified guidelines.
152. In order to reduce transaction costs in the capital markets, I propose
reduction in Securities Transaction Tax (STT) by 20 per cent (from 0.125 per
cent to 0.1 per cent) on cash delivery transactions.
153. In order to moderate the outgo on profit linked deductions, I propose to
extend the levy of Alternate Minimum Tax (AMT) on all persons other than
companies, claiming profit linked deductions.
154. I propose to introduce a General Anti Avoidance Rule (GAAR) in order
to counter aggressive tax avoidance schemes, while ensuring that it is used only
in appropriate cases, by enabling a review by a GAAR panel.
155. I propose a series of measures to deter the generation and use of
unaccounted money. To this end, I propose
 • Introduction of compulsory reporting requirement in case of assets
 held abroad.
 • Allowing for reopening of assessment upto 16 years in relation to
 assets held abroad.
http://indiabudget.nic.in

 27
 • Tax collection at source on purchase in cash of bullion or jewellery
 in excess of ` 2 lakh.
 • Tax deduction at source on transfer of immovable property (other
 than agricultural land) above a specified threshold.
 • Tax collection at source on trading in coal, lignite and iron ore.
 • Increasing the onus of proof on closely held companies for funds
 received from shareholders as well as taxing share premium in
 excess of fair market value.
 • Taxation of unexplained money, credits, investments, expenditures
 etc., at the highest rate of 30 per cent irrespective of the slab of
 income.
156. My proposals on Direct Taxes are estimated to result in a net revenue
loss of ` 4500 crore for the year.

Indirect Taxes
157. I shall now turn to indirect taxes. In a slight departure from the previous
years, I shall begin with Service Tax.

Service Tax
158. At the end of June this year, this tax will attain adulthood by completing
18 years. It is therefore time to shift gears and accelerate ahead. However, service
tax needs to confront two important challenges to sustain the journey. These are:
 • The share of services in taxes remains far below its potential.
 There is a need to widen the tax base and strengthen its
 enforcement;
 • Service Tax law is complex and sometimes avoidably different
 from Central Excise. We need to bring the two as close as possible
 in the light of our eventual goal of transition to GST.
 I have attempted to address both these issues this year.
159. Last year, I had initiated a public debate on the desirability of moving
towards taxation of services based on a negative list. In the debate that continued
for the better part of the year, we received overwhelming support for this new
concept. It has been perceived both as sound economics and prudent fiscal
management.
160. Thus, I propose to tax all services except those in the negative list. The
list comprises 17 heads and has been carefully drawn up, keeping in view the
federal nature of our polity, the best international practices and our socio-economic
requirements.

http://indiabudget.nic.in

 28
161. The important inclusions in the negative list comprise all services provided
by the government or local authorities, except a few specified services where they
compete with private sector. The list also includes pre-school and school education,
recognised education at higher levels and approved vocational education, renting
of residential dwellings, entertainment and amusement services and a large part of
public transportation including inland waterways, urban railways and metered cabs.
162. Agriculture and animal husbandry enjoy a very important place in our
lives. Practically all services required for cultivation, breeding, production,
processing or marketing up to the stage the produce is sold in the primary markets
are covered by the list.
163. In addition to the negative list, there is a list of exemptions which include
health care, services provided by charities, religious persons, sportspersons,
performing artists in folk and classical arts, individual advocates providing
services to non-business entities, independent journalists, and services by way
of animal care or car parking.
164. To take financial services to the door steps in rural areas, I have also
exempted the services of business facilitators and correspondents to banks and
insurance companies.
165. Construction services relating to specified infrastructure, canals, irrigation
works, post-harvest infrastructure, residential dwelling, and low-cost mass
housing up to an area of 60 sq. mtr. under the Scheme of Affordable Housing in
Partnership are also included in the exemptions. To make the life of those who
already own an apartment a little easier, I propose to raise the exemption for the
monthly charges payable by a member to a housing society from ` 3,000 to
`5,000.
166. The Year 2012 marks the beginning of the centenary year of Indian cinema.
Despite the change in titles from Dada Saheb Phalke’s “Raja Harishchandra” to
“Ra. One” in recent times, the industry has played a pivotal role in unifying our
country in the wake of her considerable diversity. To add to their spirit of
celebration, I propose to exempt the industry from service tax on copyrights
relating to recording of cinematographic films.
167. Movement towards the negative list will result in reducing nearly 290
definitions and descriptions in the Act to 54, and the exemptions from the existing
88 to 10, of course merging some of the existing exemptions into a revised
notification. In terms of number of pages, the law will be shorter by nearly 40
per cent.
168. As a measure of harmonisation between Central Excise and Service Tax,
a number of alignments have been made. These include a common simplified
registration form and a common return for Central Excise and Service Tax, to be
named EST-1. This common return will comprise only one page, which will be
a significant reduction from the 15 pages of the two returns at present.
http://indiabudget.nic.in

 29
169. Revision Application Authority and Settlement Commission are being
introduced in Service Tax to help resolve disputes with far greater ease.
170. Cascading of taxes has been significantly reduced by permitting utilisation
of input tax credits in a number of services such as catering, restaurants, hotel
accommodation, pandal and shamiana and transport sectors.
171. Place of Supply Rules, that will determine the location where a service
shall be deemed to be provided, are being placed in public domain for
stakeholders’ comments and shall be notified when the negative list is put into
effect. These rules will also provide a possible backdrop to initiate an informed
debate to assess all the issues that may arise in the taxation of inter-state services
for the eventual launch of GST.
172. I propose to set up a Study Team to examine the possibility of a common
tax code for service tax and central excise which could be adopted to harmonise
the two legislations as much as possible at the right time.
173. While the problems faced by exporters of goods with respect to taxes on
input services was addressed earlier this year, disbursement of taxes that go into
the export of services has been an irritant for long. I now announce a new scheme
that will simplify refunds without resorting to voluminous documentation or
verification. As an added incentive, such refunds will also be admissible for
taxes on taxable services that have been exempted.
174. Rules pertaining to the Point of Taxation are also being rationalised,
providing greater clarity and removing the irritants. Cenvat credits in a number
of areas are being restored. There are a number of other proposals both for the
facilitation of business and to check malpractices. I do not wish to take the valuable
time of this House for discussing all these proposals.
175. You will notice that most of these measures are guided by the need to
move towards a system that is simple, equitable and progressive but are unlikely
to make the exchequer richer in any significant way. Looking at our vast
commitments and to maintain a healthy fiscal situation, I propose to raise the
service tax rate from 10 per cent to 12 per cent, with consequential changes in
rates for services that have individual tax rates.
176. My proposals from service tax are expected to yield an additional revenue
of ` 18,660 crore. Keeping in mind that the share of services in GDP is 59 per
cent, you would agree that the proposed increase is not too harsh.
 I shall now deal with proposals relating to the other indirect taxes.
177. In the wake of the global financial crisis in 2008-09, the standard rate of
excise duty for non-petroleum goods was reduced from 14 per cent to 8 per cent
in a phased manner. This rate was raised from 8 per cent to 10 per cent in Budget

http://indiabudget.nic.in

 30
2010-11. Given the imperative for fiscal correction, I propose to now raise the
standard rate from 10 per cent to 12 per cent, the merit rate from 5 per cent to 6
per cent, and the lower merit rate from 1 per cent to 2 per cent. However, the
lower merit rate for coal, fertilisers, mobile phones and precious metal jewellery
is being retained at 1 per cent.
178. Large cars currently attract excise duty depending on their engine capacity
and length. In keeping with the increase proposed in the standard rate, I propose
to enhance the duty from 22 per cent to 24 per cent. In the case of cars that attract
a mixed rate of duty of 22 per cent + `15000 per vehicle, I propose to increase
the duty and switch over to an ad valorem rate of 27 per cent.
179. No change is proposed in the peak rate of customs duty of 10 per cent on
non-agricultural goods. Barring a few individual items, the rates below the peak
are also being retained.
180. I shall now take up relief proposals for specific sectors – especially those
under stress. These have been formulated to stimulate investment and
manufacturing growth.
Agriculture & Related Sectors
181. Carrying forward the initiatives taken for agriculture and agro-processing
in the previous Budgets, I propose:
 • to reduce basic customs duty from 7.5 per cent to 2.5 per cent on:
  sugarcane planter, root or tuber crop harvesting machine and
 rotary tiller and weeder;
  parts for the manufacture of these;
 • to reduce basic customs duty from 7.5 per cent to 5 per cent on
 specified coffee plantation and processing machinery;
 • to extend project import benefit to green house and protected
 cultivation for horticulture and floriculture at concessional basic
 customs duty of 5 per cent;
 • to reduce basic customs duty on some water soluble fertilisers and
 liquid fertilisers, other than urea, from 7.5 per cent to 5 per cent
 and from 5 per cent to 2.5 per cent;
 • to extend concessional import duty available for installation of
 Mechanised Handling Systems and Pallet Racking Systems in
 mandis or warehouses for horticultural produce.
182. Imports of equipment for initial setting up or substantial expansion of
fertiliser projects are being fully exempted from basic customs duty of 5 per cent
for a period of three years up to March 31, 2015.
http://indiabudget.nic.in

 31
Infrastructure
183. In the realm of infrastructure my proposals address some weaknesses in
the troika of power, coal and railways.
184. Domestic producers of thermal power have been under stress because of
high prices of coal. I propose to ease the situation by providing full exemption
from basic customs duty and a concessional CVD of 1 per cent to Steam coal for
a period of two years till March 31, 2014. Full exemption from basic duty is also
being provided to the following fuels for power generation:
 • Natural Gas and Liquified Natural Gas; and
 • Uranium concentrate, Sintered Uranium Dioxide in natural and
 pellet form.
Mining
185. Better surveying and prospecting for minerals are essential for improving
the productivity and efficiency of our mining sector. I propose to reduce basic
customs duty on machinery and instruments for surveying and prospecting from
10 per cent or 7.5 per cent to 2.5 per cent. In addition, full exemption from basic
customs duty is being provided to coal mining projects.
Railways
186. Over the next five years, Indian Railways are undertaking two major
projects for passenger safety and better service delivery. These are - the installation
of Train Protection and Warning System and upgradation of track structure for
high speed trains. I propose to reduce basic customs duty on equipment required
for their implementation from 10 per cent to 7.5 per cent.
Roads
187. Full exemption from import duty on specified equipment imported for
road construction by contractors of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways,
NHAI and State Governments is being extended to contracts awarded by
Metropolitan Development Authorities.
188. Tunnel boring machines and parts for their assembly are covered by
this exemption. I propose to allow their import free of duty without end-use
condition.
Civil Aviation
189. India has potential for establishing itself as a hub for third-party
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) of civilian aircraft. To actualize this
potential, I propose to fully exempt from basic customs duty parts of aircraft and
testing equipment imported for this purpose. As a measure of support to the
airline industry, it is also proposed to fully exempt both new and retreaded aircraft
tyres from basic customs duty and excise duty.
http://indiabudget.nic.in

 32
Manufacturing
190. My proposals for the manufacturing sector that needs support at this
juncture, seek to provide relief through cost reduction of raw materials, inputs,
components and capital goods.
191. To encourage enrichment of low-grade iron ore, of which we have huge
reserves, I propose to reduce basic customs duty on plant and machinery imported
for setting up or substantial expansion of iron ore pellet plants or iron ore
beneficiation plants from 7.5 per cent to 2.5 per cent. My other proposals relating
to the steel sector are as under:
 • to reduce basic customs duty on:
  coating material for manufacture of electrical steel from 7.5
 per cent to 5 per cent
  nickel ore and concentrate and nickel oxide/ hydroxide from
 2.5 per cent or 7.5 per cent to Nil
 • to enhance export duty on chromium ore from `3000 per tonne to
 30 per cent ad valorem
 • to enhance basic customs duty on non-alloy, flat-rolled steel from
 5 per cent to 7.5 per cent.
192. Our textile industry, especially the weaving sector, urgently needs to
modernise. I propose to fully exempt automatic shuttle-less looms from basic
customs duty of 5 per cent. Similarly, full exemption from basic duty is being
accorded to automatic silk reeling and processing machinery as well as its parts.
It is also proposed to restrict these exemptions and the existing concessional rate
of basic customs duty of 5 per cent only to new textile machinery. Second-hand
machinery would now attract basic duty of 7.5 per cent. Other proposals on
textiles are:
 • to reduce basic customs duty on wool waste and wool tops from
 15 per cent to 5 per cent
 • to reduce basic customs duty on Titanium dioxide from 10 per
 cent to 7.5 per cent
 • to extend full exemption from basic customs duty to aramid yarn
 and fabric used for the manufacture of bullet proof helmets
193. Excise duty of 10 per cent is applicable to branded ready-made garments
with abatement of 55 per cent from the Retail Sale Price. Along with increase in
duty to 12 per cent, I propose to enhance the abatement to 70 per cent. As a
result, the incidence of duty as a percentage of the Retail Sale Price would come
down from 4.5 per cent to 3.6 per cent.
194. Our MSME sector is fertile ground for the production of low-cost medical
devices. In order to provide impetus to this sector, I propose to reduce basic

http://indiabudget.nic.in

 33
customs duty to 2.5 per cent with concessional CVD of 6 per cent on specified
parts, components and raw materials for the manufacture of some disposables
and instruments. Full exemption from basic customs duty and CVD is also being
extended to specified raw materials for the manufacture of coronary stents and
heart valves. These concessions would be subject to actual user condition.
195. My other proposals to support the manufacturing sector include:
 • Full exemption from basic customs duty on
  waste paper,
  LCD and LED TV panels, and parts of memory card for
 mobile phones
 • Reduction of basic customs duty on specified raw materials for the
 manufacture of adult diapers from 10 per cent or 7.5 per cent to 5
 per cent with CVD of 6 per cent and nil special CVD.
196. My attention has been drawn to the plight of a few sectors that are highly
labour-intensive and produce items of mass consumption. As a measure of
support, I propose to enhance basic customs duty on bicycles from 10 per cent to
30 per cent and on bicycle parts from 10 per cent to 20 per cent.
197. Full exemption from excise duty is currently available to hand-made
matches while others attract the standard rate. It is proposed to reduce excise
duty on matches manufactured by semi-mechanised units from 10 per cent to 6
per cent.
Health and Nutrition
198. It is proposed to extend concessional basic customs duty of 5 per cent
with full exemption from excise duty/CVD to six specified life-saving drugs/
vaccines. These are used for the treatment or prevention of ailments such as
HIV-AIDS, renal cancer, etc.
199. Protein deficiency among women and children is one of the most common
sources of malnutrition in India. I propose to reduce basic customs duty on Soya
protein concentrate and isolated soya protein from 30 per cent or 15 per cent
respectively to 10 per cent. Simultaneously, excise duty on all processed soya
food products is being reduced to the merit rate of 6 per cent.
200. Consumption of iodised salt prevents iodine deficiency and related
diseases. I propose to provide a concessional basic customs duty of 2.5 per cent
along with reduced excise duty of 6 per cent on iodine.
201. Probiotics are a cost-effective means of combating bacterial infections.
It is proposed to reduce the basic customs duty on this item from 10 per cent to
5 per cent.

http://indiabudget.nic.in

 34
Environment
202. In order to fully realise our potential in the realm of solar energy, solar
thermal projects need encouragement. I propose to fully exempt plant and
equipment etc. for the initial setting up of such projects from special CVD.
203. Concessions have already been provided for encouraging the consumption
of energy-saving devices. I propose to fully exempt a coating chemical used for
compact fluorescent lamps, from basic customs duty. Excise duty on LED lamps
is also being reduced to 6 per cent.
204. Specified parts required for the manufacture of hybrid vehicles enjoy
full exemption from basic customs duty and special CVD with concessional
excise duty/ CVD of 6 per cent. This concession is being extended to specified
additional items and lithium ion batteries imported for the manufacture of battery
packs for supply to electric or hybrid vehicle manufacturers.
205. One of the primary drivers of the current account deficit has been the
growth of almost 50 per cent in imports of gold and other precious metals in the
first three quarters of this year. I have been advised to strengthen the steps
already taken to check this trend for better results. I propose to increase basic
customs duty on standard gold bars; gold coins of purity exceeding 99.5 per cent
and platinum from 2 per cent to 4 per cent and on non-standard gold from 5 per
cent to 10 per cent. In sync with these, basic duty on gold ore, concentrate and
dore bars for refining is being enhanced from 1 per cent to 2 per cent. On the
excise side, duty on refined gold is being increased in the same proportion from
1.5 per cent to 3 per cent.
206. In order to prevent round-tripping, it is proposed to impose basic customs
duty of 2 per cent on cut and polished, coloured gem stones at par with diamonds.
Additional Resource Mobilisation
207. I shall now take up my proposals on “demerit” goods. I propose to
increase basic excise duty on cigarettes of more than 65mm length by adding
an ad valorem component of 10 per cent to the existing specific rates. The ad
valorem duty would be chargeable on 50 per cent of the Retail Sale Price
declared on the pack.
208. I also propose to carry out a nominal increase in basic excise duty on
hand-rolled bidis from `8 to `10 per thousand and on machine-rolled bidis from
`19 to `21 per thousand. The existing exemption available to hand-rolled bidis
for clearances up to 20 lakh bidis per annum is being retained.
209. Pan masala, gutkha, chewing tobacco, unmanufactured tobacco and zarda
scented tobacco in pouches are leviable to excise duty under the compounded
levy scheme. The rates of duty specified per packing machine for these items are
being stepped up taking into account improvements in the efficiency of machines
used by this industry.

http://indiabudget.nic.in

 35
210. Crude petroleum oil produced in India attracts a cess of `2,500 per metric
tonne under the Oil Industries Development Act. This rate was last revised in
Budget 2006-07. As a measure of indexation, I propose to increase the rate of
cess to `4,500 per metric tonne.
211. Completely Built Units of large cars/ MUVs/ SUVs having engine
capacity above a prescribed threshold and whose value exceeds US dollar 40,000
per vehicle are permitted for import without type approval. Basic customs duty
on such vehicles is being enhanced from 60 per cent to 75 per cent ad valorem.
Rationalisation Measures
212. Packaged cement, whether manufactured by mini-cement plants or others,
attracts differential excise duty depending on the Retail Sale Price per bag. It is
proposed to prescribe a unified rate of 12 per cent + `120 PMT for non-mini
cement plants and 6 per cent + `120 PMT for mini-cement plants. It is proposed
to charge this duty on the Retail Sale Price less abatement of 30 per cent.
213. The House would recall that I had re-introduced a levy of excise duty of
1 per cent on branded precious metal jewellery in the last Budget. As a measure
of rationalisation, I propose to include jewellery, not bearing a brand name, under
its ambit. However, to simplify its operation and minimise its impact on small
artisans and goldsmiths, I propose:
 • to charge this duty on tariff value equal to 30 per cent of the
 transaction value;
 • to extend small-scale exemption up to annual turnover not
 exceeding `1.5 crore for units having a turnover below ` 4 crore in
 the previous year;
 • to compute turnover on the basis of tariff value; and
 • to place the onus of registration and payment on the person who
 gets jewellery manufactured on job-work.
214. I propose to fully exempt branded silver jewellery from excise duty.
215. Building of commercial vehicle bodies is currently exempt from excise
duty. In lieu of this duty, a specific rate of `10,000 is being charged on chassis in
addition to the applicable ad valorem duty. This duty structure is regressive. It is
proposed to convert the specific component of duty to an ad valorem rate of 3
per cent.
216. In the last Budget, excise duty exemption on ships and vessels including
dredgers was withdrawn. Accordingly, CVD of 5 per cent became leviable on
their imports. As the intention was not to levy this duty on the import of foreign-
going vessels, I propose to exempt such vessels from CVD retrospectively.
http://indiabudget.nic.in

 36
However, to ensure that ships, vessels and dredgers manufactured in India do
not face disability vis-à-vis foreign-going ships converting into coastal vessels,
necessary safeguard is being provided.
Baggage Allowance
217. Baggage allowance for Indians travelling abroad was last revised in 2004.
I propose to increase the duty-free allowance for eligible passengers of Indian
origin from `25,000 to `35,000 and for children of up to 10 years from `12,000
to `15,000.
218. My proposals relating to Customs and Central excise are estimated to
result in a net revenue gain of ` 27,280 crore for a full year.
219. My proposals on Direct Taxes are estimated to result in a net revenue
loss of `4500 crore for the year. Proposals relating to Indirect Taxes are estimated
to result in a net revenue gain of `45,940 crore, leaving a net gain of `41,440
crore in the Budget.
220. For the Indian economy, this was a challenging year. A number of global
and domestic factors militated against the growth that had revived in the last two
years. But India has thrived under challenges and India will do so now. In the
middle of every crisis, there is also an opportunity. It is an opportunity to re-
think, re-assess and make way for new ideas and policies. It is in this spirit that
I approached the Budget of this year. The aim is to create an enabling atmosphere
for corporates, farmers, entrepreneurs and workers to take initiatives for robust
growth. The aim is also to ensure that the benefits of growth reach all sections of
population. India stands on the brink of a major resurgence. Whether or not
today’s announcements make tomorrow morning’s headlines matters little, as
long as they help in shaping the headlines that describe India a decade from now.
 Madam Speaker, with these words, I commend the Budget to the House.




http://indiabudget.nic.in

