 PART B:
Tax Proposals
87. On behalf of all the people of India and our Government, I would first
like to thank all our taxpayers for their valuable contribution to nation building
and for providing a better life to the poor and marginalized sections of society.
Your tax helps provide dignity to our sisters and mothers with toilets and
cooking gas connections. Your tax pays for the electricity connections to the
poor who lived in darkness for generations. The tax you pay will provide health
care to 50 crore brothers and sisters, and children. It is you who is ensuring
respect, dignity, and a secure future to our retired jawans through One Rank
One Pension. Thank you, taxpayers.

88. Because of major tax reforms undertaken by us during the last four and
half years, both tax collections as well as the tax base have shown significant
increase and we have made progress towards achieving a moderate taxation–
high compliance regime. It is, therefore, just and fair that some benefits from
the tax reforms must also be passed on to the middle class taxpayers. Keeping
this in view, I propose to further reduce the tax burden on such taxpayers.
Though as per convention, the main tax proposals will be presented in the
regular budget, small taxpayers especially middle class, salary earners,
pensioners, and senior citizens need certainty in their minds at the beginning
of the year about their taxes. Therefore, proposals, particularly relating to such
class of persons should not wait. Hence, while for the present the existing
rates of income tax will continue for FY 2019-20, I propose the following:


89. Individual taxpayers having taxable annual income up to ` 5 lakhs will
get full tax rebate and therefore will not be required to pay any income tax. As
a result, even persons having gross income up to ` 6.50 lakhs may not be
required to pay any income tax if they make investments in provident funds,
specified savings, insurance etc. In fact, with additional deductions such as
interest on home loan up to ` 2 lakh, interest on education loans, National
Pension Scheme contributions, medical insurance, medical expenditure on
senior citizens etc, persons having even higher income will not have to pay any
tax. This will provide tax benefit of ` 18,500 crore to an estimated 3 crore
middle class taxpayers comprising self employed, small business, small
traders, salary earners, pensioners and senior citizens.

 22

90. For salaried persons, Standard Deduction is being raised from the
current ` 40,000 to ` 50,000. This will provide additional tax benefit of
` 4,700 crore to more than 3 crore salary earners and pensioners.

91. Currently, income tax on notional rent is payable if one has more than
one self-occupied house. Considering the difficulty of the middle class having
to maintain families at two locations on account of their job, children’s
education, care of parents etc. I am proposing to exempt levy of income tax on
notional rent on a second self-occupied house.

92. TDS threshold on interest earned on bank/post office deposits is being
raised from ` 10,000 to ` 40,000. This will benefit small depositors and non-
working spouses. Further, the TDS threshold for deduction of tax on rent is
proposed to be increased from ` 1,80,000 to ` 2,40,000 for providing relief to
small taxpayers.

93. The benefit of rollover of capital gains under section 54 of the Income
Tax Act will be increased from investment in one residential house to two
residential houses for a tax payer having capital gains up to ` 2 crore. This
benefit can be availed once in a life time.

94. For making more homes available under affordable housing, the
benefits under Section 80-IBA of the Income Tax Act is being extended for one
more year, i.e. to the housing projects approved till 31st March, 2020.

95. Also, for giving impetus to the real estate sector, I have proposed to
extend the period of exemption from levy of tax on notional rent, on unsold
inventories, from one year to two years, from the end of the year in which the
project is completed.

Concluding Remarks
96. Madam Speaker, This is not merely an Interim Budget, but a medium of
the country's development journey. All the transformation that we are
witnessing, is because of the passion of the people of our nation. The credit
goes to them only. Development has become a mass-movement during the
period of our Government.

97. We will transform India into a leading nation of the world with the help
of our people. We, along with them have laid the foundation. A grand edifice
will be erected with their support. We have given a decisive leadership, whose
intent is clear, policy is transparent and integrity is resolute.

98. With this, I commend the Budget to this august House.

