 PART – B

XII. TAX PROPOSALS
109. Mr. Speaker, Sir, I shall now present my tax proposals.
110. I had articulated the UPA Government’s principles and our approach to
taxation in my Budget speech in July 2004, and, hence, there is no need to repeat
them. While adhering to those principles, it is Government’s intention, as
announced by the Prime Minister, to undertake major tax reforms to improve the
tax to GDP ratio, expand the tax payer base, increase tax compliance and make
tax administration more efficient.
Indirect Taxes
111. I shall begin with my proposals on indirect taxes. First, customs duties.
112. I intend to advance the Government’s declared policy of making the
customs duty structure closer to that of our East Asian neighbours. Therefore, I
propose to reduce the peak rate for non-agricultural products from 20 per cent to
15 per cent.
113. Consistent with the peak duty rate, I propose to bring down the customs
duty rates on capital goods and raw materials as well as correct any inverted duty
structures.
114. In order to promote investment, I propose to reduce the customs duties
on selected capital goods and parts thereof to below 15 per cent, to 10 per cent in
some cases and to 5 per cent in some others.
115. For most textile machinery, I propose to reduce the duty from 20 per cent
to 10 per cent, in order to help the textile industry acquire a competitive edge in
the post-quota regime. Similarly, to encourage the food processing industry, I
propose to reduce the duty on refrigerated vans from 20 per cent to 10 per cent.
116. To give a leg-up to the leather and footwear industry, I propose to reduce
the customs duties on seven specified machinery from 20 per cent to 5 per cent.
The duty on ethyl vinyl acetate (EVA), an input for the footwear industry, is also
proposed to be reduced from 20 per cent to 10 per cent.
117. Pharmaceuticals and biotechnology are sunrise sectors. I propose to reduce
the customs duty on nine specified machinery used in these two sectors to 5 per
cent.
118. I also propose to reduce the customs duties on specified parts of battery-
operated road vehicles and for printing presses from 20 per cent to 10 per cent.
119. For primary and secondary metals, I propose to reduce the customs duties
from 15 per cent to 10 per cent. Similarly, industrial raw materials such as
catalysts, refractory raw materials, basic plastic materials, molasses and industrial

 25
ethyl alcohol, which are key inputs to manufacture, will now be liable to a
reduced customs duty rate of 10 per cent. On lead, I propose to reduce the duty
to 5 per cent.
120. Coking coal with high ash content attracts a duty of 15 per cent. I propose
to bring the rate down to 5 per cent.
121. Keeping in mind the crucial need to encourage the textile sector, the
customs duty rates on polyester and nylon chips, textile fibres, yarns and
intermediates, fabrics, and garments are proposed to be reduced from 20 per
cent to 15 per cent.
122. The electronics and telecom sectors merit special attention. On 217
Information Technology Agreement (ITA) bound items, the duty is required to
be brought down to nil. Consequently, to provide a level-playing field to the
domestic industry, I propose to remove the customs duty on specified capital
goods and all inputs required for the manufacture of ITA bound items.
123. However, I intend to take the power to impose a countervailing duty
(CVD) of 4 per cent on all imports to compensate for the State level taxes, in
particular the forthcoming State level VAT that is proposed to be imposed on
corresponding domestic goods. For the present, I propose to levy a CVD of 4
per cent only on the imports of ITA bound items and their inputs that attract nil
duty. Credit for the CVD will be available against payment of excise duty.
However, because we have a soft corner for these wares, IT software will be
exempt from the proposed CVD.
124. I do not propose to make any changes in the customs duties applicable to
agricultural goods. In fact, I have decided to increase the duty on cut flowers
from 30 per cent to 60 per cent. However, at the request of the trade, and since
there is little domestic production, I propose to reduce the duty rate on cloves to
35 per cent.
125. In order to encourage the import of technology to produce pure drinking
water, I propose to reduce the import duty on atmospheric drinking water
generators from 20 per cent to 5 per cent.
126. I have some proposals on the Excise side too. Government’s intention is
to bring as many goods as possible to the CENVAT rate of 16 per cent. Today, 5
items attract 24 per cent. Out of the 5, I have picked out three — polyester
filament yarn, tyres and air conditioners — and I propose to reduce the excise
duty on these goods to 16 per cent. Manufacturers of motor cars and aerated
drinks, the other two items, would have to wait for some more time.
127. Last year, I took a big step forward to prepare the textile industry to meet
the challenges of the post-quota regime. I re-affirm that the CENVAT exemption
route for natural fibres will remain in force. I now propose to give independent
texturizers the option to avail of the exemption route or pay 8 per cent excise
duty with CENVAT credit.

 26
128. Imitation jewellery now attracts an excise duty of 16 per cent. Since they
are products predominantly consumed by the less affluent sections, I propose to
reduce the excise duty to 8 per cent. At the same time, expensive and premium
jewellery is now manufactured and sold under alluring brand names. On such
branded jewellery, I propose to levy an excise duty of 2 per cent. I may clarify
that there is no levy on unbranded jewellery, including unbranded gold jewellery.
129. In order to remove certain distortions in the tax treatment of comparable
products, I propose to levy an excise duty on mosaic tiles at 8 per cent and on
road tractors for semi-trailers of engine capacity exceeding 1800 cc at 16 per
cent. I may clarify that agricultural tractors will continue to remain exempt.
130. Some sectors deserve relief, since they produce goods for the common
citizen. Today, there is a surcharge of Re.1 per kg on tea. I propose to abolish
the surcharge. There is also an excise duty of Re.1 per kg on refined edible oils
and Rs.1.25 per kg on vanaspati. I propose to abolish both levies and fully
exempt the two items.
131. Even while protecting the handmade sector that makes matches, it is
necessary to give some relief to the mechanized and semi-mechanized sectors.
Hence, I propose to reduce the excise duty from 16 per cent to 12 per cent on
matches made by these two sectors. Hand-made matches are fully exempt from
excise duty and, therefore, will continue to enjoy adequate protection.
132. I would like to provide some tax relief to the small scale industry (SSI).
Hence, I propose to raise the ceiling for SSI exemption based on turnover from
the level of Rs.3 crore per year to Rs.4 crore per year. Further, SSI units will
now have only two options: either full exemption on the first clearance of Rs.1
crore or normal duty on the first clearance of Rs.1 crore with CENVAT credit.
133. I propose to restore the excise duty rate on iron and steel to the normal
level of 16 per cent. This should have little effect on prices because the entire
duty is modvatable by most categories of consumers.
134. I propose to increase the specific duty on molasses from Rs.500 per MT
to Rs.1000 per MT to adjust partially for a hefty increase in molasses prices. I
also propose to increase the specific duty on cement clinkers from Rs.250 per
MT to Rs.350 per MT as an anti-avoidance measure.
135. The National Highways Development Project requires very large
resources. In order to raise additional resources, I propose to increase the cess on
petrol and diesel by 50 paise per litre. The additional resources will be earmarked
exclusively for the national highways, and a suitable amendment is being proposed
to the Central Road Fund Act, 2000.
136. The levy of an education cess has been widely applauded. The health
sector demands similar treatment. What better way is there to fund health care

 27
than tax those goods which are health hazards? I, therefore, propose to raise
some additional resources and allocate the proceeds to finance the National Rural
Health Mission. Accordingly, I propose to increase the specific rate on cigarettes
by about 10 per cent and impose a surcharge of 10 per cent on ad valorem duties
on other tobacco products including gutka, chewing tobacco, snuff and pan
masala. However, biris will not be subject to this levy.
137. Finally, there is the issue of taxes on petroleum products. After examining
the Lahiri committee’s report, I propose to make major changes in the customs
and excise duty rates. The customs duty on crude petroleum will be reduced
from 10 per cent to 5 per cent.
138. On LPG for domestic consumption and on subsidized kerosene, the
customs duty will be nil. On both products, the excise duty will also be nil.
139. On other petroleum products, including motor spirit (MS) and diesel
(HSD), I propose to reduce the customs duty from the current level of 20 or 15
per cent to 10 per cent. I also propose to fix the excise duties on petrol and diesel
as a combination of ad valorem and specific duties.
140. The proposed changes are revenue neutral, and I have been assured that
there will be no increase in the retail prices of these products as a result of the
changes in the duty structure.
141. Consequent upon the changes made in customs and excise duties, the
drawback rates for exported goods will be reviewed and modifications, wherever
necessary, will be notified by April 30, 2005.
142. Hon’ble Members are aware that many goods are chargeable to excise
duty on a value with reference to their maximum retail price (MRP), after allowing
suitable abatement. The system of quantifying the abatement should be made
transparent. There should also be a mechanism to review the rate of abatement
to reflect changed circumstances. Hence, as a trade facilitation measure, I propose
to set up an advisory committee to advise the Government on the extent of
abatement for both excise duty and service tax.
143. The other indirect tax is service tax. Since the services sector accounts
for about 52 percent of the GDP it is necessary to cast the net wide.
144. Last July, I raised the rate of service tax to 10 per cent. I propose to
maintain that rate.
145. I also propose to grant relief to small service providers. Accordingly, I
propose to exempt from service tax those service providers whose gross turnover
does not exceed Rs.4 lakh per year. According to my calculation, 80 per cent of
the present service tax payers will gain from the exemption.
146. I propose to include some additional services in the service tax net. New
services to be covered include pipeline transport of goods; site formation,

 28
demolition and like services; membership fees of clubs and associations;
packaging and specialized mailing services; survey and map making services;
dredging services in rivers and harbours; cleaning services for commercial
buildings and similar premises; and construction of planned residential
complexes, with more than 12 dwelling units, developed by builders.
147. I also propose to expand the coverage of certain services, but I shall not
burden you with the details.
Direct Taxes
148. I shall now turn to my proposals on direct taxes.
149. Last July, as an interim measure, I made a provision under which a person
with a taxable income of Rs.100,000 would not be required to pay any income
tax. About 1.4 crore assessees got relief. I promised to revisit the subject in this
Budget.
150. As part of a major overhaul of direct taxes, I propose to alter the tax
brackets after taking due note of the universal demand of Members of Parliament
and the need to provide stability in the medium term.
151. Accordingly, I propose that the new tax brackets and the new rates will
be as follows:
 Up to Rs.1 lakh .. nil
 Rs.1 lakh to Rs.1.5 lakh .. 10 per cent
 Rs.1.5 lakh to Rs.2.5 lakh .. 20 per cent
 Above Rs.2.5 lakh .. 30 per cent
Further, the level at which the surcharge of 10 per cent will apply will be raised
to Rs.10 lakh taxable income. Hon’ble members will be happy to note that tax
payers in every tax bracket will gain from my proposal.
152. Besides, I propose to fix the threshold exemption level for women at
Rs.1.25 lakh and the exemption level for senior citizens at Rs.1.5 lakh. These
revised exemption levels will be in lieu of the prevailing tax rebate provisions.
153. Given the higher exemption limits and the scaling up of tax brackets, the
need for a separate personal allowance does not exist. Therefore, in conformity
with growing international practice, I propose to remove the standard deduction.
154. There is now a plethora of exemptions, ostensibly intended to promote
savings. Some exemptions are based on the principle of deduction from taxable
income and some exemptions are based on the principle of tax rebate. I believe
the time is ripe to clean up these exemptions. At the same time, it is necessary to
encourage savings, and tax relief is a method to induce people to save. Further,
I think that the State must be neutral between one form of saving and another,
and allow the tax payer greater flexibility in making savings/investment decisions.

 29
155. For all these reasons, in addition to the basic exemption limits, I propose
to allow every tax payer a consolidated limit of Rs.1 lakh for savings which will
be deducted from the income before tax is calculated. All prevailing sectoral
caps will be removed. The rebate under Section 88 is being eliminated and Section
80L is being omitted to reflect the new regime.
156. In addition to the sum of Rs.1 lakh, the following six deductions will
continue to receive the same tax treatment as prevails today:
 i) interest paid on housing loan for self-occupied house property;
 ii) medical insurance premia;
 iii) specified expenditure on disabled dependant;
 iv) expenses for medical treatment for self or dependant or member of
 a HUF;
 v) deduction in respect of interest on loans for pursuing higher studies;
 and
 vi) deduction to a person with disability.
157. Tax treatment of savings is a complex issue but we can benefit from the
best international practices in this regard. We have already introduced EET-
based taxation in the defined contribution pension scheme applicable to newly
recruited government servants. Before we fully migrate to the EET system for
all kinds of savings, it is necessary to resolve a number of administrative issues.
Hence, without making any change for the present, I propose to set up a committee
of experts that will work out the road map for moving towards an EET system.
158. Bowing to popular demand, I propose to continue the exemption from
tax on interest earned on accounts maintained by Non Resident Indians.
159. While the tax reliefs that I have given today should warm the hearts of
the tax payers, I have also an obligation to raise resources, especially to meet the
large requirements of NCMP-mandated programmes.
160. I have looked into the present system of taxing perquisites and I have
found that many perquisites are disguised as fringe benefits, and escape tax.
Neither the employer nor the employee pays any tax on these benefits which are
certainly of considerable material value. At present, where the benefits are fully
attributable to the employee they are taxed in the hands of the employee; that
position will continue. In addition, I now propose that where the benefits are
usually enjoyed collectively by the employees and cannot be attributed to
individual employees, they shall be taxed in the hands of the employer. However,
transport services for workers and staff and canteen services in an office or factory
will be outside the tax net. The tax is not a new tax, although I am obliged to call
it by a new name, namely, Fringe Benefits Tax. The rate will be 30 per cent on
an appropriately defined base.

 30
161. I believe I have given a large measure of relief to personal income tax
payers, and I hope all sections of the people and all members of the House are
happy. This leads me to corporate income tax.

162. The corporate income tax rate, the surcharge thereon and the rates of
depreciation are inter-linked. Any reform would have to address all three
elements. The international best practice is to provide for depreciation at rates
that would enable the investor to replace the asset before its economic life ends.
In India, in addition to the depreciation rate we have allowed an initial depreciation
in order to encourage new investment. Hon’ble members may recall that, last
July, I reduced the condition relating to increase in installed capacity from 25 per
cent to 10 per cent.

163. I am also obliged to keep in mind that a number of profit making
companies continue to pay low tax, even if well within the law, by taking
advantage of liberal depreciation rates and of exemptions and incentives.
Moreover, the current depreciation rates lean towards employing capital rather
than labour.

164. There is also a demand that corporate tax rates should be aligned with
the highest marginal personal income tax rate.

165. After careful consideration of the pros and cons, the interest of the revenue
and the need to give the corporate sector a measure of relief, I propose the
following tax structure.

166. For domestic companies, the corporate income tax rate will be 30 per
cent. There will also be a surcharge of 10 percent. The rate of depreciation will
be 15 per cent for general machinery and plant, but the initial depreciation rate
will be increased to 20 per cent.

167. The corporate sector will find that the proposed tax structure is fair, gives
them relief of nearly 3 per cent in the tax rate, encourages new investment and
ensures equity among all sections of corporate tax payers.

168. As a further measure of relief, I propose to remove the requirement of 10
per cent increase in installed capacity for availing of the benefit of initial
depreciation.

169. To encourage technological upgradation, I propose to reduce the
withholding tax on technical services from 20 per cent to 10 per cent.

170. I also propose that credit will be allowed for the Minimum Alternate Tax
(MAT) paid under Section 115 JB of the Income Tax Act.

171. I do not propose to make any changes in the tax regime applicable to
foreign companies.

 31
172. Last July, I had indicated that I would review the terminal dates on
exemptions given for specific purposes. Accordingly, I propose to extend the
terminal date, in the following three cases, from March 31, 2005 to March 31,
2007:
 • Weighted deduction of 150 per cent of expenditure on in-house
 research and development facilities of companies engaged in the
 business of biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, electronics,
 telecommunication, chemicals or any other notified product;
 • Deduction of profits of new industrial undertakings in Jammu &
 Kashmir;
 • 100 per cent deduction of profits of companies carrying on scientific
 research and development and approved by the Department of
 Scientific and Industrial Research.
173. In deference to the request from Air India and Indian Airlines, I propose
to extend up to September 30, 2005 the exemption from tax on agreements to
acquire aircraft or aircraft engines on lease.
174. The securities transaction tax (STT) has stabilized, but the rates are widely
perceived to be too low. I, therefore, propose to make a very nominal increase in
the rates for all categories of transactions. Thus, a day trader who is liable to pay
STT at 0.015 per cent will now be liable to pay at 0.02 per cent. This small
increase should not ruffle anyone’s feathers. This nominal rate of increase will
apply to all categories.
175. As Hon’ble Members are aware, there have been significant developments
in the past decade in the capital market including the introduction of trading in
financial derivatives. We have also established a transparent system of trading
with adequate safeguards for audit trail. Hence, I propose to amend the Income
Tax Act to provide that trading in derivatives in specified stock exchanges will
not be treated as “speculative transactions” for the purposes of the Income Tax
Act.
176. I propose to amend the one-in-six criteria for filing income tax returns.
Mobile telephone will be removed. Instead, payment for electricity of more than
Rs.50,000 per year will be included as a criterion for filing a return of income.
177. The NCMP requires the Government to introduce special schemes to
unearth black money and assets. I am obliged to carry out the mandate, but
without giving undeserved relief or an amnesty. I am concerned about large cash
transactions, especially withdrawals of cash, when there is no ostensible purpose
to withdraw such large amounts of cash. These cash withdrawals leave no trail,
and presumably become part of the black economy. Therefore, I propose to
introduce two anti tax-evasion measures: Firstly, I propose to levy a tax on
withdrawal of cash on a single day of over Rs.10,000 or more from banks at the
rate of 0.1 per cent. Thus, a person withdrawing Rs.10,000 in cash would have
to pay a small sum of Rs.10. Secondly, I propose to require banks to report to the

 32
Government all deposits which are exempt from TDS on interest. I intend to
observe the results of these steps before I propose any further measures.
178. Many administrative reforms are underway in the Department of Revenue.
Among them are the tax information network (TIN) and the on-line tax accounting
system (OLTAS).
179. As a measure of facilitation, I propose to follow international practice
and establish large taxpayer units (LTUs). To begin with, these units will be set
up in major cities. I would like to invite large tax payers, whether of corporate
tax or income tax or excise duties or service tax, to participate in the programme
and avail of the single window service. For small taxpayers, I propose to set up
Help Centres in cooperation with industry associations, professional bodies and
NGOs.
180. I have received many suggestions on amendments to the direct tax laws
and the indirect tax laws. I have decided to accept some suggestions that require
to be acted upon immediately, but I do not propose to burden the Finance Bill
with those changes. Instead, I intend to introduce a separate Bill for that purpose
during this session. In due course, I intend to place before Parliament a revised
and simplified Income Tax Bill.
181. My tax proposals on direct taxes are expected to yield a gain of Rs.6,000
crore. On the indirect taxes side, they are broadly revenue neutral.

XIII. CONCLUSION
 Mr. Speaker, Sir,
182. One of India’s proudest sons, Dr Amartya Sen, argues in his book
“Development as Freedom” that development is a process of expanding the real
freedoms that people enjoy. He says, “Growth of GNP or of individual incomes
can, of course, be very important as means to expanding the freedoms enjoyed
by the members of the society. But freedoms depend also on other determinants,
such as social and economic arrangements (for example, facilities for education
and health care) as well as political and civil rights.” The UPA Government
accepts this ethical dimension to the discussion of economic issues, and in this
Budget I have attempted to reflect that dimension. More or less the same idea
was articulated two thousand years ago by Saint Tiruvalluvar who said:
 “Pini Inmai Selvam Vilaivu Inbam Emam
 Ani Enba Nattirkku Iv Iyndhu”
 (Health, wealth, produce, the happiness that is the result, and security
 These five, the learned say, are the ornaments of a polity)
183. This Budget, Mr Speaker, is an attempt to lay down a path in which
growth and equity will reinforce each other and build a new India.
184. Sir, with these words, I commend the Budget to the House.

