 PART B
 1 0 1 . Sir, I now present my tax proposals, indirect taxes first.
 1 0 2 . In my earlier budgets, I have endeavoured to ensure a continuity of approach
in framing my revenue proposals. The principles that have guided me have been the
need for growth in revenues, simplification and rationalization of the tax regime, and
effective tax compliance through measures, which are friendly for the honest taxpayer,
and a deterrent to the evader. I have reduced the number of rates in both customs
and excise duties, simplified procedures and introduced measures to improve tax
compliance. I have given up my discretionary power to grant excise and customs
duty exemptions in individual cases thus saving hundreds of crore of revenue for
Government. The policy of penalties against tax evaders has also been made non-
discretionary. With all these steps I have sought to put an end to a system that
pressure groups or lobbies could influence. My attempt this year is to take this
process to its logical conclusion.
 1 0 3 . In my last budget, I had introduced the rate of 16% as the rate of Central
Value Added Tax (CENVAT). I had also rationalized the rates of special excise duty to
three, namely, 8%, 16% and 24%. The single rate of CENVAT now contributes
about 68% of the total excise revenues from ad valorem duties.
 1 0 4 . I now propose to reduce the three rates of special excise duty to a single
rate of 16%. As a consequence, I propose to abolish the 8% special excise duty on
the following items:
 (1) Glazed tiles
 (2) Mattresses and articles of bedding
 (3) Carpets and floor coverings
 (4) Painted canvas, studio back cloth, etc
 (5) Linoleum and textile wall coverings etc.
 (6) Scooters and motorcycles, and
 (7) Ta x i s
 These items will now be charged to CENVAT only at the rate of 16%.

 23
 1 0 5 . White cement and other special cements, yachts and pleasure boats, arms
and ammunition for private use and articles of fur skins, will attract SED of 16%
and a total duty of 32%.
 1 0 6 . The special excise duty on aerated soft drinks, soft drink concentrates
supplied to vending machines, and motorcars will be reduced to 16%, thus putting
an end to the rate of 24% special excise duty. These items also will now bear a total
duty of 32%. There will be no change in respect of products, which already attract
this rate of 32%.
 1 0 7 . There are a few items that currently attract CENVAT at half the rate, namely,
8%. All these items will henceforth be charged to the normal rate of 16% except
cotton yarn including sewing thread, LPG, kerosene and diesel engines up to 10 HP,
which I am leaving at 8% for the present in the larger public interest.
 1 0 8 . After these rationalization measures about 80% of the revenue in respect
of ad valorem duties will come from the single rate of 16% and about 17% from the
combined rate of 32%.
 1 0 9 . India is the world’s second largest producer of fruits and vegetables. However,
most of these are wasted in the absence of proper storage and processing facilities.
Food-processing industry dealing in perishable fruits and vegetables needs special
support. I, therefore, propose to exempt food preparations based on fruits and
vegetables completely from excise duty. This will include a very wide range of products
of common use like pickles, sauces, ketchup and juices, etc. This, along with the
support I have given to creation of better storage facilities will give a fillip to the food
processing industry and will go a long way in improving the rural economy of our
country.
 1 1 0 . The Eleventh Finance Commission has recommended a special levy for the
replenishment of the National Calamity Contingency Fund. As an ad hoc measure,
this was provided for in the current year through a special surcharge on corporate
taxes. I propose to establish this funding on a regular basis through a special
surcharge of excise on a range of products the use of which should be discouraged
on health grounds. I propose to levy a surcharge of 15% on cigarettes. The duty on
biris would increase from Rs 6 to Rs 7 per thousand biris. The total duty on pan
masala would be 55%/60%. Miscellaneous tobacco products like chewing tobacco
would be charged to a total duty of 60%.
 1 1 1 . Excise duty on High Speed Diesel was reduced from 16% to 12% in
September last year. I propose to restore it to the normal CENVAT rate of 16%. I also
propose to restore special excise duty on motor spirit to the previous rate of 16%.
The burden of increase in duty is not proposed to be passed on to the consumers
except for any technical corrections.
 1 1 2 . LPG is charged to excise duty at 8%. I propose to apply the same rate of
duty to Compressed Natural Gas, which is exempt at present.
 1 1 3 . A special scheme of charging excise duty from independent textile processors
on compounding basis was introduced in December 1998. The working of this scheme
has resulted in serious distortions. I have therefore decided to revert to the ad valorem

 24
duty structure for independent textile processors with effect from 1, March 2001.
Independent processors would be allowed to take CENVAT credit of the duty paid on
inputs on a deemed basis.
 1 1 4 . There is no economic logic to continue with excise duty exemption on
garments sold under a registered trade name. I propose to impose a duty of 16% on
such garments.
 1 1 5 . Products of SSI units are exempt from excise duty up to Rs one crore. This
exemption is intended to provide fiscal support to the genuinely small producers. I
propose to withdraw this exemption in respect of the following items, in which misuse
of the exemption is more than likely:
 « Cotton yarn
 « Ball or roller bearings
 « Arms and ammunition for private use

 1 1 6 . The excise duty structure on matches comprises rates of duty ranging from
25 paise to Rs 2.40 per hundred boxes of 50 sticks each. I propose to rationalise the
existing rates to a more rational structure with a duty rate of 50 paise for the
handmade sector, Re.1 for the middle sector, Rs 2 for the semi-mechanized sector
and Rs 3 for the mechanized sector.
 1 1 7 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, in the matter of rates of duties of excise I have almost
achieved the ultimate with only one basic rate of CENVAT and one rate of special
excise duty. The procedures in excise have also been made modern. I can humbly
claim that excise duty is now a model of value added tax up to the manufacturing
stage.
 1 1 8 . The only issue, which remains to be tackled now, is the issue of individual
exemptions. The regime of exemptions is incompatible with a simple, equitable and
rational tax structure that has now been put in place. I am not doing away with the
exemptions altogether, realizing that this may come as a sudden shock to those who
are accustomed to exemptions. However, I will like to give notice to them to be prepared
to pay duties like anyone else. For the present, I am making a modest beginning by
imposing a nominal duty of 4% on some items like goggles, imitation jewellery,
rubberized mattresses etc. which in four equal annual installments will be taken to
16%. More and more items will be put on this escalator every year.
 1 1 9 . Structural changes have taken place in the economy with the service sector
growing faster than other sectors. I am expanding the net of service tax and I propose
to add the following services to the list of taxable services:
 • Specified Banking and Financial Services
 • Authorized Service Stations for servicing of vehicles including two wheelers
 • Port Services
 • Broadcasting Services

 25
 • Photographic Services
 • Convention Services
 • Sound Recording Services
 • Scientific and Technical Consulting Services
 • Telex Services
 • Telegraph Services
 • Facsimile Services
 • On-line Information & Data Base Retrieval services
 • Video Tape Production Services
 • Services auxiliary to Insurance

 1 2 0 . I propose to bring the service provided to lease circuit line holders also in
the tax net.
 1 2 1 . I now turn to my proposals relating to customs duties.
 1 2 2 . In my previous budgets, I have reduced the total number of major customs
duty rates to four, that is, 35%, 25%, 15% and 5%. I do not wish to propose any
further reduction in the number of customs duty rates this year. However, I propose
to discontinue the surcharge of 10%. With this, peak level of customs duty will
decline marginally from 38.5% to 35%.
 1 2 3 . All agricultural produce already attracts the peak rate of duty of 35% or
more. Current tariffs on major cereals are: Wheat (50%), Rice (70%/80%) and Maize
(50%). I now propose to increase the customs duty on tea, coffee, copra, and coconut
and desiccated coconut from the present 35% to 70%.
 1 2 4 . Similarly, I propose to increase the rate of duty on crude edible oils ranging
from 35% to 55% at present to a uniform rate of 75% and on refined oils from 45%/
65% to 85%. A lower rate of 45% would apply to soyabean oil on account of WTO
binding. I also propose to enhance the rate of customs duty on the import of crude
palm oil by vanaspati manufacturers from 25% to 55% and restrict this concession
to sick vanaspati units only. The others will pay 75%. I wish to assure the House
that in order to safeguard the interest of our farmers we shall move swiftly whenever
any perceptible threat on account of imports is noticed.
 1 2 5 . The House is aware that Government has committed itself to abolish customs
duty on IT and telecom products and their inputs and components under the ITA 1
Schedule by 2003. The customs duty on these products is proposed to be reduced to
15% from 1, March 2001 from current levels.
 1 2 6 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, with the abolition of the remaining Quantitative Restrictions
in April this year second hand cars will also become freely importable. To allay the
fears of surge in import of second hand cars, the rate of basic customs duty on their

 26
import will be raised to 105%, which is three times the peak rate. The total duty now
applicable to second hand cars will be more than 180%. I propose a similar structure
of duty for the import of old multi utility vehicles, scooters and motor cycles.
 1 2 7 . In order to provide a level playing field for domestic liquor producers, I
propose to levy CVD at a suitable rate on imported liquor, taking into account the
levies of state excise on domestic production.
 1 2 8 . Our textile industry has to modernize itself and acquire the latest technology
in order to face global competition and attain high quality of production. I propose to
reduce the basic customs duty on specified textile machines, including shuttle-less
looms, from 15% to 5%. As a measure of further relief to the textile sector, I propose,
to reduce the customs duty on silk waste, cotton waste and flax fibre from 35% /
25% to 15%.
 1 2 9 . There are some cases of anomaly in customs duty between raw materials
and intermediate goods on the one hand, and intermediate goods and final products
on the other. DMT, PTA, MEG and Caprolactum are raw materials for production of
man-made fibers and yarns. However, the customs duty on these materials is higher
than the rate applicable to fibers and yarn. I propose to reduce the customs duty on
DMT, PTA, MEG and Caprolactum from 25% to 20%, which is the WTO bound rate
for synthetic fibers and yarns. Similarly, soda ash is an input for the production of
glassware, detergents etc. and currently attracts the peak customs duty of 35%
along with the final products. I propose to reduce it to 20%. I also propose to reduce
the customs duty on polyester chips and nylon chips for the manufacture of fibers
and yarns from 35% to 25%.
 1 3 0 . On the same analogy, the customs duty on high quality DBM, seawater
magnesia and fused magnesia is being reduced from 25% to 15%.
 1 3 1 . Gems and jewellery have considerable potential for export. I propose to
reduce the customs duty on cut and polished coloured gem stones from 35% to
15%. I also propose to reduce the customs duty on specified equipment when imported
by training institutes sponsored by the Gem and Jewellery Export Promotion Council
from 25% to 15%. The rate of customs duty on rough diamonds would now be 5%.
 1 3 2 . CNG kits and their parts attract low duty at 5%. I propose to extend the
same treatment to LPG conversion kits and their parts.
 1 3 3 . LNG is not produced in India. The burden of CVD on the import of LNG
adds to the cost of LNG projects. I therefore propose to exempt LNG from CVD.
 1 3 4 . For the same reason, I also propose to exempt wattle extract from the
application of CVD.
 1 3 5 . I propose to reduce the customs duty on cement, and clinkers from 35% to
25%. I am confident that this reduction would help softening of domestic prices of
cement for the benefit of consumers.
 1 3 6 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, accredited pressmen and cameramen are allowed to import
cameras, computers, fax machine etc. up to a value of one lakh rupees for their
professional use without payment of customs duty once in five years. In view of

 27
many good photographs they have taken of use, I propose to reduce this long waiting
period from five years to two years.
 1 3 7 . In order to encourage better quality of cinematography I propose to reduce
the customs duty on cinematographic cameras, projectors and certain other related
equipment used by the film industry from 25% to 15%.
 1 3 8 . In order to discourage smuggling I propose to reduce the duty on gold from
Rs 400 per 10 grams to Rs 250 per 10 grams.
 1 3 9 . Several industry associations have pointed out that the CVD on the imported
consumer products should also be charged on the basis of maximum retail price;
otherwise it does not provide a level playing field. I accept the logic of their argument.
The Finance Bill contains the enabling provision to implement this decision.
 1 4 0 . I propose to withdraw the exemption from customs duty on a few items and
impose on them a nominal duty of 5%.
 1 4 1 . I have already promised that our customs tariff would be brought down to
East Asian levels. I will like to move progressively within three years to reduce the
number of rates to the minimum with a peak rate of 20%. The modalities for this
will be worked out in time for the next budget.
 1 4 2 . Sir, a number of steps are also being taken for greater procedural and
administrative efficiency.
 1 4 3 . A new Manual of Procedures and Instructions on Central Excise and
Customs would be brought out by 1, September 2001. The emphasis would be on
simplicity, brevity and transparency. I also propose to simplify the central excise
rules to make them user friendly.
 1 4 4 . My proposals on the excise side are estimated to result in a revenue gain of
Rs 4677 crore in a year. On the customs side my proposals are estimated to result in
a revenue loss of Rs 2128 crore. I estimate that the indirect tax revenue next year
would be Rs 1,40,992 crore.
 1 4 5 . Copies of the notifications issued to give effect to the changes in excise and
customs duties shall be laid on the Table of the House in due course.
 1 4 6 . In Direct Taxes, my thrust during the last three years has been on providing
stability of tax rates, widening the tax base, rationalizing and simplifying the tax
laws and giving impetus to economic growth. These efforts have resulted in increasing
the direct tax revenue from Rs 46,428 crore in 1998-99 to an estimated Rs 74,467
crore this year. In addition, the number of assessees has increased significantly
from a little over one crore in March 1998 to 2.3 crore at the beginning of this year.
I, therefore, propose to continue with the same rates this year also. Co-operative
Societies, however, will henceforth pay 30% tax instead of 35%.
 1 4 7 . While imposing the surcharge of 10 % on corporates and non-corporates in
my budget of 1999-2000, I had promised that this would be a temporary levy. However,
I was constrained to increase the surcharge on non-corporate tax payers at the
higher income levels to 15% due to the unexpected expenditure burden of Kargil.

 28
During the course of this financial year I had further levied a surchage of 1% on
corporates towards the National Calamity Contingency Fund and an additional 2%
on all tax payers for the Gujarat Earthquake relief. I now propose to remove all
surcharges payable by corporates and non-corporates except the surcharge of 2 %
for relief to quake hit areas of Gujarat. Individuals having an income of up to Rs
60,000/- will not be subject to this surcharge.
 1 4 8 . As a welfare measure, Sir, I propose to allow 100% deduction for donations
to the National Trust for welfare of persons with autism, cerebral palsy, mental
retardation and multiple disabilities.
 1 4 9 . Hon’ble Members are aware that the modified one-by-six scheme, which I
introduced in the Finance Act, 1998 to identify potential income-tax assessees and
to bring them into the tax net, has paid rich dividends. I, therefore, propose to
extend the one-by-six scheme to all urban areas in the country as defined by the
1991 Census. Changes arising out of the 2001 census will be incorporated
subsequently.
 1 5 0 . Certain companies are not filing their returns of income, presumably on
the plea that they are not having any taxable income. These companies go out of
fiscal discipline and their financial transactions during the initial years escape
scrutiny. I therefore, propose that all companies should file their returns even if they
incur a loss.
 1 5 1 . Sir, another effective measure of widening the tax base is to further enlarge
the scope of deduction of tax at source. Income tax at source will henceforth be
deductible at the rate of 10 % on income by way of commission or brokerage exceeding
Rs 2,500/-, except on transactions relating to shares and securities.
 1 5 2 . Winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles etc. are currently taxed at 40%.
As the marginal personal income tax rates have now stabilized at 30%, this income
will also now be taxed at 30%. Television game shows are very popular these days. I
wish the winners well. At the same time, I propose that income tax at the rate of 30%
will be deducted at source from the winnings of these and all similar game shows.
 1 5 3 . At present, tax is deducted at source on income from interest on time
deposits only if such income exceeds Rs 10,000/- in respect of deposits with a Bank
or Housing Finance Company and Rs 5,000/- in other cases. These threshold limits
have led to the erosion of tax base and under-reporting of taxable income due to
splitting up of deposits. I, therefore, propose to lower this limit to Rs 2,500/- in all
cases.
 1 5 4 . With economic liberalization, the pay package of salaried class is undergoing
many changes. It is being divided into various components and the forms of perquisites
and benefits or amenities provided by the employers are assuming new dimensions.
To align our tax system with the present structure of pay packages, I propose that
the value of perquisites, benefits or amenities shall be determined on the basis of
their cost to the employer, except in respect of houses and cars where different
criteria will be adopted for simplicity.

 29
 1 5 5 . Sir, I also propose to provide relief to salaried persons in the lower income
range having income up to rupees one lakh. Such persons will get an enhanced tax
rebate at the rate of 30% in respect of their eligible investments under section 88 of
the Income Tax Act, as against 20% at present.
 1 5 6 . In the case of Export Oriented Units, and units located in Export Processing
Zones, Free Trade Zones and Software Technology Parks 25% of their sales in the
domestic market are currently tax exempt. I propose to provide for the taxation of
profits from these domestic sales of such units.
 1 5 7 . I.T. Sector continues to do well and should be encouraged to do better. I,
therefore, propose that profits derived by the units located in the software technology
parks from the export of “on-site” services will be eligible for deduction like their
other export income. Units located outside these zones will also get the benefit of tax
exemption on such export earnings. I further propose that the condition relating to
transfer of ownership of companies in sections 10A and 10B of the Income-tax Act
shall not apply in respect of companies in which public are substantially interested.
 1 5 8 . The income of NABARD, National Housing Bank and Small Industries
Development Bank of India (SIDBI) was exempted from tax in order to provide fiscal
support in the initial years of their functioning. Now these institutions have come of
age and are working on commercial lines. I, therefore, propose to withdraw the tax
exemption available to these institutions.
 1 5 9 . The interest payable on certain External Commercial Borrowings (ECBs) is
currently exempt from tax. Having regard to the fact that interest received by the
lender is taxable in the country of his residence and he would get a credit for any tax
paid by him in India, any exemption from tax liability in the host country does not
benefit the lender but only results in reducing our tax revenues. I, therefore, propose
that the tax exemption in respect of interest paid on such External Commercial
Borrowings will not be available for such borrowings made on or after the first day of
June 2001.
 1 6 0 . Certain interest income up to a limit of Rs 12,000 is deductible at present
under section 80L. In addition, income from Government securities is also
deductible up to Rs 3,000. I propose to reduce the maximum limit of this deduction
to Rs 9,000.
 1 6 1 . The tax payable on the distribution of dividends of domestic companies
and income in respect of Units of Mutual Funds and UTI was increased from 10% to
20% last year. To provide a stimulus to the growth of capital market, I propose to
reduce this tax to 10%.
 1 6 2 . To help revive investor-interest in primary issues I propose to exempt long-
term capital gains arising from the sale of securities and Units if such gains are
reinvested in primary issues of shares of public companies.
 1 6 3 . Sir, the tax incentives in the form of tax holidays for infrastructure facilities
are proposed to be further rationalized and enlarged. For the core sectors of
infrastructure namely, roads, highways, rail system, water treatment and supply,
irrigation, sanitation and solid waste management systems, I now propose a ten-

 30
year tax holiday which may be availed of during the initial twenty years. In the case
of airports, ports, inland ports and waterways, industrial parks and generation and
distribution of power, which also become commercially viable only in the long run, a
tax holiday of ten years is being proposed to be availed of during the initial fifteen
years. The period of commencement of business for power and industrial parks is
also being extended up to 31, March 2006.
 1 6 4 . The five-year tax holiday and 30 % deduction for next five years was available
to the telecommunications sector till 31, March 2000. I propose to reintroduce this
concession retrospectively for the units commencing their operations on or before
31, March 2003. These concessions will also be extended to internet service providers
and broadband networks.
 1 6 5 . Sir, in addition to the tax holiday proposed for development of infrastructure,
tax incentives have also been provided for the investors providing long-term finance
or investing in the equity capital of the enterprises engaged in infrastructure facility.
Any income by way of interest, dividends or long-term capital gains from such
investments is fully exempt. I propose to extend this concession to guarantee
commissions and credit enhancement fees earned by financial institutions from
infrastructure enterprises. Co-operative Banks will also be eligible for exemption of
their income from investments in approved infrastructure facilities.
 1 6 6 . To be globally competitive, our companies need to increase their investment
and expenditure for Research and Development. Currently, a weighted deduction of
150% of the expenditure on in-house research and development in certain areas is
allowed to companies. Sir, I propose to extend this weighted deduction to biotechnology
as well for clinical trials, filing patents and obtaining regulatory approvals. I also
propose that the entire amount paid to specified projects under the India Millennium
Mission, 2020 will be eligible for 125 % weighted deduction.
 1 6 7 . To encourage development of industrial infrastructure, I had provided
100% deduction of export profits for a period of ten years to units operating in the
Special Economic Zones last year. I now propose to give further tax incentives for
the development of these zones. The concessions available for infrastructure by
way of a 10-year tax holiday will be available to the developers of Special Economic
Zones on the same lines as developers of industrial parks. The income of investors
making long term investment for the development of SEZs will also be exempt.
 1 6 8 . The storage of food grains and their transportation are our major concern.
Sir, I propose to provide a tax holiday for five years and 30% deduction of profits for
the next five years to the enterprises engaged in the integrated business of handling,
transportation and storage of food-grains.
 1 6 9 . Sir, for promoting the industry that provides the cup that cheers, I propose
to increase the development allowance available for tea from 20% to 40%. This
additional allowance will be used only for re-plantation, rejuvenation, and
modernization of tea plantations and processing facilities.
 1 7 0 There has been a long-standing demand from the Shipping Industry that
the rate of depreciation available in respect of ships and inland water vessels may be
increased. I propose to increase this rate of depreciation to 25%.

 31
 1 7 1 . To encourage investments in weaving, processing and garment sectors of
the textile industry, I propose to allow accelerated depreciation at the rate of 50% on
plants and machinery purchased under the Technology Up-gradation Fund Scheme.
 1 7 2 . In order to give a boost to the commercial vehicles sector presently facing
recession, I propose to allow accelerated depreciation at the rate of 50% on new
commercial vehicles for one year.
 1 7 3 . Each of my past three budgets has provided for increasing tax incentives
for the housing sector. Sir, continuing with this practice, I propose to further increase
the maximum amount of deduction available for interest payable on housing loans
for self-occupied houses from rupees one lakh to rupees one and a half lakhs.
 1 7 4 . For persons having income from house property, the present deduction of
25 % of annual value for repairs etc. is proposed to be enhanced to 30%. However,
there will be no further deductions, except for the expenditure incurred by way of
interest payment on housing loans.
 1 7 5 . I propose to extend the tax incentives allowed by way of deduction or rebate
on payments of LIC premium to all insurance companies that have been approved
by the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
 1 7 6 . The presence of multinational enterprises in India and their ability to allocate
profits in different jurisdictions by controlling prices in intra-group transactions has
made the issue of transfer pricing a matter of serious concern. I had set up an
Expert Group in November 1999 to examine the issues relating to transfer pricing.
Their report has been received, proposing a detailed structure for transfer pricing
legislation. Necessary legislative changes are being made in the Finance Bill based
on these recommendations.
 177. The foreign telecasting channels will henceforth be taxed in India, on their
income computed in accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax Act.
 1 7 8 . Sir, I propose to bring about a number of measures that will be friendly to
the taxpayer. The time limits for issue of refunds, reassessment and reopening of
assessments by the Income-tax Department are proposed to be reduced. The
Department will also no longer have power to withhold the refund due to an assessee.
Similarly, there will be no requirement to obtain a Tax Clearance Certificate under
section 230A from the Assessing Officer before transfer of immovable property. I
also propose to remove the discretion presently available in deciding the quantum of
penalties. Henceforth, a fixed amount of penalty will be leviable for most of the
defaults.
 1 7 9 . Certain educational and medical institutions are required to be approved
for claiming tax exemption. At present, these institutions have to file their application
for approval to the Central Board of Direct Taxes. Sir, I propose to delegate this
power to Chief Commissioners of Income-tax.
 1 8 0 . To sum up, Sir, my proposals made in this Budget on the Direct Taxes will
result in a revenue loss of Rs 5,500 crore, which I propose to make up with tax

 32
buoyancy and increased voluntary compliance. I estimate that the direct tax revenue
in 2001-2002 would be Rs 84,800 crore.
 1 8 1 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, with these proposals I estimate total tax revenue receipts
for the Centre at Rs 163031 crore and the fiscal deficit at Rs 116314 crore or 4.7%
of GDP. I could have managed a lesser fiscal deficit but that would have been possible
only at the cost of growth, which was unacceptable.
 1 8 2 . This is a budget for carrying forward the second generation of economic
reforms. This is a budget for growth. This is a budget for equity with efficiency.
This is a budget for a new deal to the people of India in the new millennium.
 1 8 3 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, with these words, I commend the budget to this august
house.

