 PART B

XI. TAX PROPOSALS
9 2 . I shall now deal with my tax proposals.
9 3 . Taxation is a key tool of fiscal policy. The NCMP has promised that “tax rates
will be stable and conducive to growth, compliance and investment”. Thanks to
policies initiated in the 1990s, direct tax rates are now moderate and require only
fine tuning from time to time. Indirect taxes have also been moderated through a
calibrated reduction in customs and excise duties. The proportion of direct tax

 19
revenues to GDP has increased from 1.9 per cent in 1990-91 to 3.8 per cent in 2003-
04. As expected, the proportion of indirect tax revenues to GDP has declined from
7.9 per cent in 1990-91, but the decline has been rather sharp with the proportion
at 5.3 per cent in 2003-04. The weak spot is central excise. Excise revenues are
stuck, rather stubbornly, at around 3.3 per cent of GDP. While reduction in excise
duty rates partly accounts for this situation, the expansion of the manufacturing
industry ought to have given us larger revenues.
9 4 . Through my policies on taxation, I wish to signal that we remain committed to
moderation and stability in tax rates; that we remain committed to increasing revenues
from direct taxes and excise duties; and that we remain committed to expanding the
service tax net because the services sector accounts for 51 per cent of GDP. I shall
also use tax policies to provide incentives to certain kinds of investment and to
influence certain kinds of behaviour in the market.
9 5 . I am a votary of tax reforms but it would be unwise on my part to attempt to do
tax reform in a hurried or piece-meal manner. Seven months from now there will be
another Budget, and there will be an occasion to visit the subject of tax reform.
Direct taxes
9 6 . I shall begin with my direct tax proposals. Let me give you the good news first.
No one with a taxable income of Rs.100,000 will be required to pay any income tax
any more. It was not easy to reach this decision. While the tax rates are moderate,
it is the tax slabs which cause concern. However, I am unable to alter the tax slabs
because I cannot afford to lose a large amount of revenue at a time when the
Government has assumed a larger responsibility for investment and welfare
programmes. Out of nearly 3.4 crore persons filing income tax returns, only 2.7
crore assessees are taxpayers. My proposal will give relief to 1.4 crore assessees.
The method that I have adopted is somewhat novel. While everyone will file his
return according to the current tax slabs and tax rates, and compute his taxable
income and the tax payable, any one with a taxable income of Rs.100,000 will
have his income tax liability automatically rebated. I cannot give more relief, or
relief across the Board, in this Budget. If compliance improves, I promise to revisit
the subject.
9 7 . I propose to give relief to certain sections of deserving tax payers. Accordingly,
I propose to exempt from income tax the family pension received by widows, children
and nominated heirs of members of the armed forces and the paramilitary forces
killed in the course of operational duties. This is my humble salute to their
supreme sacrifice.
9 8 . I propose to extend the benefit of Section 80DD and Section 80U in respect of
persons suffering from autism, cerebral palsy and multiple disability.
9 9 . Farmers have brought to my notice that agricultural land situated in certain
urban agglomerations fall under the definition of capital asset and the compensation
for acquisition of such land is subjected to capital gains tax. Such compensation
deserves to be exempted from capital gains tax. I propose to do so in cases where
the compensation or the enhanced compensation has been received on or after
April 1, 2004.

 20
1 0 0 . A new ‘defined contribution’ pension scheme for new entrants into Central
Government service has come into effect from January 1, 2004. The tax treatment
of contributions made to the scheme has engaged the attention of Government. I
propose to adopt the universally accepted formula of EET: that is, the contributions
will be excluded from income for tax purposes; the accruals will also be exempt
from tax; and only the terminal benefits will be taxed at the applicable rate in the
year of receipt.
1 0 1 . I propose to withdraw a few exemptions which have outlived their utility.
Interest earned from a Non-Resident (External) Account and interest paid by banks
to a Non-Resident or to a Not-Ordinarily Resident on deposits in foreign currency
will not be exempt from tax. Similarly, any payment made by an Indian company to
acquire an aircraft or an aircraft engine on lease from a foreign state or a foreign
enterprise will not be exempt from tax. These exemptions will cease prospectively
from September 1, 2004.
1 0 2 . Hon’ble Members are aware that I abolished the gift tax in 1997. That decision
remains, but a loophole requires to be plugged to prevent money laundering.
Accordingly, purported gifts from unrelated persons, above the threshold limit of
Rs.25,000, will now be taxed as income. Gifts received from blood relations, lineal
ascendants and lineal descendants, and gifts received on certain occasions like
marriage will continue to be totally exempt.
1 0 3 . In order to promote agro-processing industries, I propose to amend Section
80 IB of the Act to allow a deduction of 100 per cent of profits for 5 years and 25 per
cent of profits for the next 5 years in the case of new agro-processing industries set
up to process, preserve and package fruits and vegetables.
1 0 4 . Investment in the manufacturing sector deserves the Government’s attention.
Hence, I propose to continue with the additional depreciation of 15 per cent allowed
under Section 32(1)(iia) on new plant and machinery acquired or installed in an
existing undertaking; however, the required increase in installed capacity will now
be 10 per cent, and not 25 per cent.
1 0 5 . The automobile sector has done well and needs to be encouraged. I therefore
propose to notify the automobile industry as an industry entitled to 150 per cent
deduction of expenditure on in-house R&D facilities.
1 0 6 . The power sector also deserves tax concessions. The Electricity Act 2003
envisages unbundling of generation, transmission and distribution. In order to
promote renovation and modernization of existing transmission and distribution
lines, I propose to extend the benefit under Section 80 IA to projects undertaken
during the period April 1, 2004 to March 31, 2006.
1 0 7 . The shipping industry has demanded the levy of a tonnage tax to make it
intentionally competitive. Tonnage tax will also induce more ships to fly the Indian
flag. I propose to accept the request. Consequently, the concessional regime under
Section 33 AC will be withdrawn and shipping companies will now have only an
option to pay the tonnage tax or normal corporate tax on profits.

 21
1 0 8 . I propose to extend the benefit of Section 80 IB to new hospitals with 100 beds
or more set up in rural areas. Such hospitals will be entitled to a 100 per cent
deduction of their profits for a period of five years.
1 0 9 . The housing industry enjoys certain benefits under Section 80 IB for
projects approved before March 31, 2005. I propose to extend the time limit to
March 31, 2007.
1 1 0 . A small problem has plagued the reconstruction and development of existing
buildings under approved plans in the city of Mumbai. Perhaps the problem is there
in some other cities too. I, therefore, propose to relax the condition of minimum plot
size of one acre in the case of housing projects, as long as the projects are implemented
in accordance with a scheme for reconstruction or development approved by the
Central or State Government.
1 1 1 . Capital gains tax is another vexed issue. When applied to capital market
transactions, the issue becomes more complex. Questions have been raised about
the definitions of long-term and short-term, and the differential tax treatment meted
to the two kinds of gains. There are no easy answers, but I have decided to make a
beginning by revamping taxes on securities transactions. Our founding fathers had
wisely included entry 90 in the Union List in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution
of India. Taking a cue from that entry, I propose to abolish the tax on long-term
capital gains from securities transactions altogether. Instead, I propose to levy a
small tax on transactions in securities on stock exchanges. The rate will be 0.15 per
cent of the value of security. Thus, a transaction involving securities valued at, say,
Rs.100,000 will now bear a small tax of Rs.150. The tax will be levied on the buyer.
In the case of short-term capital gains from securities, I propose to reduce the rate of
tax to a flat rate of 10 per cent. My calculation shows that the new tax regime will be
a win-win situation for all concerned.
1 1 2 . I propose to make a change in the tax on dividends distributed by mutual
funds. Equity-oriented mutual funds will continue to be exempt from tax. Debt-
oriented mutual funds are now required to withhold 12.5 per cent of the income
distributed to unit holders. Individuals and HUF unit holders will continue to enjoy
the benefit of this rate. However, in the case of corporate unit holders, I propose a
rate of 20 per cent. I am sure corporates will understand, because I am doing no
more than partially closing a window of arbitrage opportunity.
1 1 3 . I propose to put an end to bonus-stripping and dividend-stripping in units by
making a suitable amendment to Section 94 of the Act.
1 1 4 . I also propose some measures to widen the tax base and to plug revenue
leakage. I do not wish to take the time of the House detailing each measure.
1 1 5 . Tax deduction at source (TDS) and tax collection at source (TCS) are being
extended to some more activities. Amendments are proposed to Section 40(a)(i) and
Section 194 C.
1 1 6 . The telecom sector enjoyed certain benefits under Section 80 IA for services
commenced before March 31, 2004. Pending a detailed examination of the needs of
the telecom sector, I propose to extend the terminal date to March 31, 2005.

 22
1 1 7 . Companies carrying on scientific research and development and approved by
the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research before April 1, 2004 are entitled
to 100 per cent deduction of profits for 10 years. On the request of the Department
of Bio-Technology and pending a detailed examination, I propose to extend the
terminal date to March 31, 2005.
1 1 8 . New industrial undertakings in Jammu & Kashmir enjoyed 100 per cent tax
exemption if they commenced production before March 31, 2004. Pending a detailed
examination of the incentives required to promote industrial development in Jammu
& Kashmir, I propose to extend the date to March 31, 2005.
Indirect taxes
1 1 9 . Now, I turn to my indirect tax proposals. The policy signal that needs to be
reiterated is that customs duties will be brought down in a measured way. It is my
intention to align India’s tariff structure to those of ASEAN countries. Eventually,
there should be a uniform rate of tax on goods and services. During the last four
years, my predecessors had adjusted excise duties and moved them towards a Central
VAT rate. That process must continue. The most important goods in the
manufacturing sector must therefore bear an excise duty of 16 per cent.
1 2 0 . Another principle that requires to be emphasized is that where an excise duty
is levied, subject to only a few exceptions, like goods when imported should attract
an equivalent countervailing duty (CVD). In my tax proposals, I have, therefore,
removed the exemption from CVD enjoyed by some imported goods where there is
no corresponding exemption from excise duty on Indian made goods.
1 2 1 . I may also point out that customs tariffs and excise duties are inter-related.
While considering the tax regime for any sector, one must look at both customs
duties and excise duties applicable to that sector.
1 2 2 . The peak rate of customs duty was reduced to 20 per cent in January 2004. I
propose to maintain the peak rate for the rest of the current fiscal year.
1 2 3 . I shall now deal with specific sectors beginning with metals, minerals and
industrial raw materials. Steel is the leading metal. Normally, it should bear an
excise duty of 16 per cent. However, in February this year, excise duty on steel was
reduced from 16 per cent to 8 per cent, but with the caveat that the decision will be
reviewed when the regular budget is presented. Belying expectations, steel prices
have not moderated but have risen sharply. I propose to reduce the customs duty on
non-alloy steel from 15 per cent to 10 per cent and to increase the excise duty on steel
from 8 per cent to 12 per cent so that the countervailing duty will also be applicable to
imports. I hope to recoup some of the revenue losses since February 2004.
1 2 4 . Alloy steel, copper, lead, zinc and base metals are basic raw materials used in
a variety of industries. I propose to reduce the peak rate on such metals to 15 per
cent. I also propose to reduce the customs duties on refractory raw minerals and
mineral products like graphite, asbestos, mica and gypsum to 15 per cent. The
customs duty on all catalysts will also be 15 per cent.
1 2 5 I propose certain concessions to the agriculture sector. To encourage value
addition, while retaining customs duty on crude palm oil at 65 per cent, I propose to

 23
accept the recommendation of the Tariff Commission and increase the duty on refined
palm oil to 75 per cent.
1 2 6 . Some items of plantation machinery attract a customs duty of 5 per cent. I
propose to extend the concessional rate to more items pertaining to the tea and
coffee plantation sector.
1 2 7 . On the excise front, I propose to make a number of concessions. Tractors
attract an excise duty of 16 per cent. Hereafter, tractors will be fully exempt. Likewise,
dairy machinery which attracts an excise duty of 16 per cent will be fully exempt.
Hand tools such as spades, shovels, sickles etc, which currently attract a 16 per
cent excise duty will also be fully exempt.
1 2 8 . Excise duty on preparations of meat, poultry and fish will be reduced from 16
per cent to 8 per cent and excise duty on food grade hexane (used in the edible oil
industry) will be reduced from 32 per cent to 16 per cent.
1 2 9 . I propose to give some concessions to the health sector. A number of items for
the disabled are already exempt from import duties or attract a concessional duty of
5 per cent. I propose that rehabilitation aids such as talking books, braille computer
terminals, braille writers and typewriters, assistive listening devices, cochlear implants
and stair lifts be fully exempt from customs duty. They will also be exempt from
excise duty and CVD. Crutches, wheel chairs, walking frames, artificial limbs, etc.
for the disabled will also be fully exempt from customs duty. There are some
restrictions on institutions for the visually-impaired and the hearing-impaired availing
of import duty exemptions. I propose to remove these restrictions as well as enlarge
the list of exempted appliances. Ambulances used by government and municipal
hospitals alone have been allowed the concessional excise duty of 16 per cent. I
propose that all ambulances registered as such will be entitled to this benefit.
Diagnostic kits for detecting hepatitis B alone are exempt from excise duty. I propose
to extend the exemption to kits for detection of all types of hepatitis.
1 3 0 . In order to move toward the Cenvat rate, I propose to levy excise duty on
contact lenses and playing cards. I also propose to increase the excise duty from 8
per cent to 16 per cent on a few items including vaccum flasks, plastic insulated
ware, scented supari, prefabricated buildings, laboratory glassware, black and white
television sets, populated PCBs, imitation jewellery, candles and parts of clocks and
watches. Let me hasten to add that in all these cases the general SSI exemption will
continue to be available, and consumers and small manufacturers will not be affected
at all. Even other manufacturers will avail of Cenvat credit.
1 3 1 . In order to protect matches made in the non-mechanised sector, I propose to
increase the excise duty on matches made in the mechanized/semi-mechanised
sector from 8 per cent without Cenvat credit to 16 per cent with Cenvat credit.
1 3 2 . The Information Technology sector has, by and large, been kept out of the
reach of the tax collector. Under the Information Technology Agreement, customs
duty will be brought down to zero in 2005. Meanwhile, I propose to abide by the
bound rates under the agreement.
1 3 3 . I propose to exempt specified raw materials for manufacture of parts of cathode
ray tubes and specified capital goods for manufacture of mobile handsets, plasma

 24
display panels etc. from excise duty. Specified items for manufacture of telecom
grade optical fibres and cables are also proposed to be exempt from customs duty.
Mobile switching centres imported by cellular mobile telephone service providers are
now exempt from customs duty. I propose to extend the exemption to imports by
universal access service providers.
1 3 4 . Computers attract excise duty of 8 per cent. I propose to grant full exemption.
1 3 5 . I propose to give some excise relief to LPG gas stoves bearing an MRP up
to Rs.2000, footwear with MRP upto Rs.250 and writing instruments with MRP
upto Rs.200.
1 3 6 . I propose to reduce the excise duty on amusement rides from 20 per cent to
10 per cent.
1 3 7 . Having been Commerce Minister, export promotion is close to my heart. I
propose to extend the concessional customs duty of 5 per cent on capital goods
enjoyed by the leather industry to the non-leather footwear industry too.
1 3 8 . Finished leather of all kinds is exempt from customs duty. I propose to exempt
patent leather also.
1 3 9 . Platinum is a serious challenger to gold in the jewellery industry. Both should
be treated alike. Hence, I propose to reduce the import duty on platinum from
Rs.550 per 10 grams to Rs.200. I propose that rough coloured precious gemstones
should be exempt from customs duty just as rough semiprecious stones are.
1 4 0 . Area specific exemptions from excise duty have been granted from time to
time. The North Eastern States and J&K are in a class by themselves. The exemptions
enjoyed by them will continue. Sikkim, Uttaranchal and Himachal Pradesh were
also granted area-based exemptions. Hon’ble Members are fully aware of the
arguments in favour and the rival arguments against. I have to be fair to both sides.
Accordingly, I propose that area specific exemptions enjoyed by States other than
the North Eastern States and J & K will continue and be available to units set up or
expanded on or before March 31, 2007.
1 4 1 . I shall now deal with the most challenging tax problem that I faced this year.
This relates to the textile sector. Last year, handlooms and powerlooms were brought
into what is described as the Cenvat chain. The intention was good but, I am
afraid, the decision did not take into account the decentralized and fragmented
nature of production of fabrics in the country. Besides, the so-called Cenvat chain
had nearly 40 exemptions at different stages. In fact, two exemptions were added
after the decision.
1 4 2 . I am conscious that the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing will come to an
end on December 31, 2004. Our textile sector must, therefore, be made more efficient
and competitive. Those who can compete because of their organizational strength
should be allowed to compete; for the rest, we must allow more time to comply with
a mandatory tax regime. Meanwhile, there must be a level playing field.
1 4 3 . If I have understood correctly the mind of Hon’ble Members of Parliament, and
of the leaders of various political parties, I believe that there is a universal demand

 25
to free the handloom and powerloom sectors from the Cenvat regime. After giving
my anxious consideration to the complex issues, I propose to withdraw the
mandatory Cenvat duty. Instead, I propose to introduce a new tax regime for the
textile sector and, in this exercise, I am happy to say that I have the full support of
the Minister of Textiles.
1 4 4 . Let me now explain briefly the new regime.
 ♦ Firstly, the mandatory Cenvat chain will stand abolished.
 ♦ Secondly, there will be no mandatory excise duty on pure cotton, wool and
 silk, whether it is fibre, yarn, fabric or garment.
 ♦ Thirdly, blended textiles and pure non-cotton (polyester, viscose, acrylic
 and nylon) will have a different tax regime.
 ♦ Fourthly, there will be a mandatory excise duty on man-made staple fibre
 at 16 per cent; on polyester filament yarn (including textured yarn) at 24
 per cent; and on other man-made filament yarn (including textured yarn)
 at 16 per cent.
1 4 5 . Every manufacturer – be it handloom or powerloom or composite mill – will
have the option to choose between two routes. One will be the exemption route and
the other will be the Cenvat route. Under the exemption route, no excise duty will be
payable at any stage (except on man-made fibre and filament yarn). Under the
Cenvat route, credit can be taken for all excise duties paid at earlier stages. For the
purposes of the optional Cenvat route, it is necessary to specify in the Tariff schedule
the applicable excise duty rates. For the pure cotton sector, the uniform rate will be
4 per cent on yarn, fabrics, garments and made-ups. For the blended textiles sector
and pure non-cotton sector, the uniform rate will be 8 per cent.
1 4 6 . It is my firm belief that the millions of handloom weavers and powerloom
weavers will welcome the new regime. As far as the composite mills are concerned,
there is no cause for worry. They are also free to take the exemption route, but if
they choose to opt for the Cenvat route, they may do so and claim Cenvat credit for
all duties paid at earlier stages. Garment exporters should give the new regime a
fair chance. I expect that prices of fabrics will moderate and garment exporters will
stand to benefit. Their concerns, if any, can be addressed through the drawback or
DEPB mechanism.
1 4 7 . In course of time, it is possible that some manufacturers of handlooms and
powerlooms will take advantage of the low uniform rates of duty and opt for the
Cenvat route.
1 4 8 . There remains the service tax. I propose to take a major step towards
integrating the tax on goods and services. Accordingly, I propose to extend credit of
service tax and excise duty across goods and services. In order to neutralize the
revenue impact of such extension, and keeping in mind the mean Cenvat rate, I
propose to enhance the rate of service tax from 8 per cent to 10 per cent.
1 4 9 . 58 services have been brought under the net so far. I propose to add some
more this year. These are business exhibition services; airport services; services
provided by transport booking agents; transport of goods by air; survey and exploration

 26
services; opinion poll services; intellectual property services other than copy right;
brokers of forward contracts; pandal and shamiana contractors; outdoor caterers;
independent TV/radio programme producers; construction services in respect of
commercial or industrial constructions; and life insurance services to the extent
of the risk premium. I may clarify that there is no intention to levy service tax on
truck owners or truck operators. Nor, as was clarified by my predecessor, is
there any intention to levy service tax on the savings part of the premium collected
by an insurer.
1 5 0 . I also propose that some currently taxable services should be redefined to
cover all service providers falling under the same category, but I do not wish to
burden this speech with the details. Exemptions granted in the case of some taxable
services are proposed to be removed. The administration of service tax will be made
more tax-payer-friendly. I propose to do away with the mandatory verification of self
assessment and the mandatory penalty for non-registration.
1 5 1 . Finally, there is the tax mandated by the NCMP. That is an education cess on
all taxes. I propose to levy a cess of 2 per cent on income tax, corporation tax, excise
duties, customs duties and service tax.
1 5 2 . Besides my tax proposals, I have looked at another source of revenue. There
are large recoverable arrears both in direct taxes and indirect taxes. Even the
undisputed arrears are quite substantial. I have, therefore, assumed that I would
be able to recover a tidy sum this year. A special, multi-pronged drive will be made
to recover these arrears, the details of which will be announced later.

1 5 3 . My tax proposals on direct taxes are expected to yield a gain of Rs.2000 crore.
On the indirect taxes side, they are broadly revenue neutral.

XII. CONCLUSION
1 5 4 . Mr. Speaker, Sir. The countries of the world, India included, have set for
themselves the Millennium Development Goals. Our date with destiny is not at the
end of the millennium, but in the year 2015. Will we achieve those goals? In the
eleven years that remain, it is in our hands to shape our destiny. Progress is not
always on a linear path, nor is it inevitable. Two thousand years ago, Saint Tirvalluvar
said:
 “Aran Izhukkathu Allavai Neeki Maran Izhukka
 Maanam Udayathu Arasu”
 (They are good rulers who observe ethics, commit no crime and walk
 the path of honour and courage)
If we bring thought and passion to our goverance, and walk the path of honour and
courage, we can make the future happen. And this century will be India’s century.
1 5 5 . Sir, with these words, I commend the Budget to the House.

