 PART B



XI. TAX PROPOSALS

188. Madam Speaker, I shall now present my tax proposals.

189. Taxes are important for every economy to fund Government expenditure
on security and welfare of its people. In the interim Budget 2014-15, my
predecessor had set revenue collection targets for direct taxes as well as indirect
taxes, which appear to be ambitious. I propose to retain these targets and it shall
be my endeavour to achieve the same. The impact of the tax changes now
proposed have of course been factored into the Budget Estimates, 2014-15.

190. While preparing the tax proposals, I had to encounter the challenge of an
extremely limited fiscal space. Nonetheless, I propose to introduce measures to
revive the economy, promote investment in manufacturing sector and rationalize
tax provisions so as to reduce litigation as well as to address the problem of
inverted duty structure in certain areas. I also propose to give relief to individual
taxpayers and to certain sectors of the economy.

 Direct Taxes
191. Let me begin with direct taxes.

192. Madam Speaker, I do not propose to make any change in the tax rate.
However, with a view to provide relief to small and marginal taxpayers and
senior citizens, I propose to increase personal income tax exemption limit by
`50,000 that is, from ` 2 lakh to ` 2.5 lakh in the case of individual taxpayers
who are below the age of 60 years. Similarly, I also propose to raise the exemption
limit from ` 2.5 lakh to ` 3 lakh in the case of senior citizens.

193. I do not propose to make any change in the rate of surcharge either for
the corporates or the individuals, HUFs, firms etc.

194. The education cess for all taxpayers shall continue at 3 percent.

195. In the year 2012-13 the gross domestic savings were 30.1% of the GDP
as compared to 33.7% in the year 2009-10. Increase in savings and their
productive use leads to higher economic growth. The households are the main
contributors to savings. Therefore, to encourage domestic investment in long

 34
term savings, I propose to increase the investment limit under section 80C of the
Income-tax Act from ` 1 lakh to ` 1.5 lakh.

196. Housing continues to be an area of concern for middle and lower middle
class due to high cost of financing. Therefore, to reduce this burden, I propose
to increase the deduction limit on account of interest on loan in respect of self
occupied house property from ` 1.5 lakh to ` 2 lakh.

197. Infrastructure and construction sectors have a significant role in the
economy. Growth in these sectors is necessary to revive the economy and generate
jobs for millions of our young boys and girls. As stated earlier and with a view to
attract large scale investment in these sectors, I have provided a conducive tax
regime for Infrastructure Investment Trusts and Real Estate Investment Trusts to
be set up in accordance with regulations of the Securities and Exchange Board
of India.

198. The manufacturing sector is of paramount importance for the growth of
our economy. This sector has multiplier effect on creation of jobs. Last year, an
incentive in the form of investment allowance to a manufacturing company that
invests more than ` 100 crore in plant and machinery during the period from
01.04.2013 to 31.03.2015 was announced. Considering the need to incentivize
smaller entrepreneurs, I propose to provide investment allowance at the rate of
15 percent to a manufacturing company that invests more than ` 25 crore in any
year in new plant and machinery. This benefit will be available for three years
i.e. for investments upto 31.03.2017. The Scheme announced last year will
continue to operate in parallel till 31.03.2015.

199. I also propose to extend the investment linked deduction to two new
sectors, namely, slurry pipelines for the transportation of iron ore, and semi-
conductor wafer fabrication manufacturing units. This will boost investment in
these two critical sectors.

200. Supply of power continues to be a major area of concern for the country.
Therefore, instead of annual extensions, I propose to extend the 10 year tax
holiday to the undertakings which begin generation, distribution and transmission
of power by 31.03.2017. This stability in our policy will help the investors to
plan their investments better.

201. Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs) have invested more than ` 8 lakh crore
(about 130 billion US $) in India. One of their concerns is uncertainty in taxation
on account of characterization of their income. Moreover, the fund managers of
these foreign investors remain outside India under the apprehension that their
presence in India may have adverse tax consequences. With a view to put an end

 35
to this uncertainty and to encourage these fund managers to shift to India,
I propose to provide that income arising to foreign portfolio investors from
transaction in securities will be treated as capital gains.

202. The concessional rate of tax at 15 percent on dividends received by Indian
companies from their foreign subsidiaries has resulted in enhanced repatriation
of funds from abroad. I propose to continue with this concessional rate of 15
percent on foreign dividends without any sunset date. This will ensure stability
of taxation policy.

203. In order to augment low cost long term foreign borrowings for Indian
companies, I propose to extend the eligible date of borrowing in foreign currency
from 30.06.2016 to 30.06.2017 for a concessional tax rate of 5 percent on interest
payments. I also propose to extend this tax incentive to all types of bonds instead
of only infrastructure bonds. I hope this measure will enable the companies to
step up their investments in India.

204. In order to reduce litigation on transfer pricing issues, I propose to make
certain changes in Transfer Pricing regulations.

 (1) An Advance Pricing Agreement (APA) scheme was introduced in
 the year 2012. It has received good response. I propose to strengthen
 the administrative set up of APA to expedite disposal of applications.
 Further, I propose to introduce a “Roll Back” provision in the APA
 scheme so that an APA entered into for future transactions may also
 be applied to international transactions undertaken in previous four
 years in specified circumstances.

 (2) In order to align Transfer Pricing regulations in India with the best
 available practices, I propose to introduce range concept for
 determination of arm’s length price. However, the arithmetic mean
 concept will continue to apply where number of comparable is
 inadequate. The relevant data is under analysis and appropriate rules
 will be prescribed.

 (3) As per existing provisions of Transfer Pricing Regulations, only one
 year data is allowed to be used for comparable analysis with some
 exception. I propose to amend the regulations to allow use of multiple
 year data.

 Necessary legislative amendments to give effect to the above proposals
including those relating to the Authority for Advance Rulings and Income-tax
Settlement Commission will be moved in the current session of the Parliament.

 36
205. In the case of Mutual Funds, other than equity oriented funds, the capital
gains arising on transfer of units held for more than a year is taxed at a concessional
rate of 10% whereas direct investments in banks and other debt instruments
attract a higher rate of tax. This allows tax arbitrage opportunity. This arbitrage
has hardly benefitted retail investors as their percentage is very small among
such Mutual Fund investors. With a view to remove this tax arbitrage, I propose
to increase the rate of tax on long term capital gains from 10 percent to 20 percent
on transfer of units of such funds. I also propose to increase the period of holding
in respect of such units from 12 months to 36 months for this purpose.

206. In the year 2003, the tax liability on income by way of dividends was
shifted from the shareholder to the company. The shareholder was required to
pay tax on the gross dividends, but now the company pays tax on the dividend
amount net of taxes. Similarly, in the case of Mutual Fund, income distribution
tax is paid on the income distributed net of taxes. I propose to remove this
anomaly both in the case of the company and the Mutual Fund.

207. Currently, where an assessee fails to deduct and pay tax on specified
payments to residents, 100 percent of such payments are not allowed as deduction
while computing his income. This has caused undue hardship to taxpayers,
particularly where the rate of tax is only 1 to 10%. Hence, I propose to provide
that instead of 100 percent, only 30% of such payments will be disallowed.

208. The Direct Taxes Code Bill, 2010 has lapsed with the dissolution of the
15th Lok Sabha. Having considered the report of the Standing Committee on
Finance and the views expressed by the stakeholders, my predecessor had placed
a revised Code in the public domain in March, 2014. The Government shall
consider the comments received from the stakeholders on the revised Code. The
Government will also review the DTC in its present shape and take a view in the
whole matter.

209. Income-tax Department is expected to function not only as an enforcement
agency but also as a facilitator. A number of Aykar Seva Kendras (ASK) have
been opened in different parts of the country. I propose to extend this facility by
opening 60 more such Seva Kendras during the current financial year to promote
excellence in service delivery.

210. The focus of any tax administration is to broaden the tax base. Our policy
thrust is to adopt non intrusive methods to achieve this objective. In this direction,
I propose to make greater use of information technology techniques.

211. Net Effect of the direct tax proposals is revenue loss of ` 22,200 crore.

 37
 Indirect Taxes
212. I now turn to indirect taxes and shall begin with customs duties.

213. Manufacturing sector is under stress due to a variety of reasons. To boost
domestic manufacture as also to address the issue of inverted duties, I propose to
reduce the basic customs duty (BCD) on:
 • Fatty acids, crude palm stearin, RBD and other palm stearin, specified
 industrial grade crude oils from 7.5 percent to Nil for manufacture
 of soaps and oleo-chemicals;
 • Crude glycerin from 12.5 percent to 7.5 percent and crude glycerin
 used in the manufacture of soaps from 12.5 percent to Nil;
 • Steel grade limestone and steel grade dolomite from 5 percent to 2.5
 percent;
 • Battery waste and battery scrap from 10 percent to 5 percent;
 • Coal tar pitch from 10 percent to 5 percent;
 • Specified inputs for manufacture of spandex yarn from 5 percent to
 Nil.

214. In order to encourage new investment and capacity addition in the
chemicals and petrochemicals sector, I propose to reduce the basic customs duty
on reformate from 10 percent to 2.5 percent; on ethane, propane, ethylene,
propylene, butadiene and ortho-xylene from 5 percent to 2.5 percent; on methyl
alcohol and denatured ethyl alcohol from 7.5 percent to 5 percent; and on crude
naphthalene from 10 percent to 5 percent.

215. The demand for electronics is growing very fast. To boost domestic
production and reduce our dependence on imports, I intend to take the following
steps:
 • Impose basic customs duty at 10 percent on specified
 telecommunication products that are outside the purview of the
 Information Technology Agreement;
 • Exempt all inputs/components used in the manufacture of personal
 computers from 4 percent special additional duty (SAD);
 • Impose education cess on imported electronic products to provide
 parity between domestically produced goods and imported goods;
 • Exempt 4 percent SAD on PVC sheet and ribbon used for the
 manufacture of smart cards.

 38
216. Cathode ray TVs are used by weaker sections who cannot afford to buy
more expensive flat panel TVs. I propose to exempt colour picture tubes from
basic customs duty to make cathode ray TVs cheaper. The duty concession will
help revive manufacturing of TVs in the SME sector and create employment
opportunities. At the same time, to encourage production of LCD and LED TVs
below 19 inches in India, I propose to reduce the basic customs duty on LCD
and LED TV panels of below 19 inches from 10 percent to Nil. Further, to
encourage manufacture of LCD and LED TV panels, I propose to exempt from
basic customs duty specified inputs used in their manufacture.

217. The domestic stainless steel industry is presently suffering from severe
under-utilization of capacity. To give an impetus to the stainless steel industry,
I propose to increase the basic customs duty on imported flat-rolled products of
stainless steel from 5 percent to 7.5 percent.

218. We need to maximize our utilization of solar power. The existing duty
structure incentivizes imports rather than domestic manufacture of solar
photovoltaic cells and modules. Therefore, I propose to exempt from basic
customs duty:
 • specified inputs for use in the manufacture of EVA sheets and back
 sheets;
 • flat copper wire for the manufacture of PV ribbons.

 A concessional basic customs duty of 5 percent is also being extended to
machinery and equipment required for setting up of a project for solar energy
production.

219. To promote wind energy, I propose to reduce the basic customs duty
from 10 percent to 5 percent on forged steel rings used in the manufacture of
bearings of wind operated electricity generators. Also, I propose to exempt the
SAD of 4 percent on parts and raw materials required for the manufacture of
wind operated generators. Further, I propose to prescribe a concessional basic
customs duty of 5 percent on machinery and equipment required for setting up
of compressed biogas plants (Bio-CNG).

220. I have only highlighted some of the proposals in the Budget 2014-15.
I am sure these measures would incentivize value addition, generate income and
create more jobs in India.

221. I have also undertaken several tax rationalization measures. At present,
coal attracts customs duties at different rates. I propose to rationalize the duty
structure on all non-agglomerated coal at 2.5 percent basic customs duty and 2
percent CVD. Henceforth, anthracite coal, bituminous coal, coking coal, steam

 39
coal and other coal will attract the same duty. This will eliminate all assessment
disputes and transaction costs associated with testing of various parameters of
coal.

222. Metallurgical coke is manufactured out of coking coal. The basic customs
duty on metallurgical coke is being increased from Nil to 2.5 percent in line with
the duty on coking coal.

223. Ships imported for breaking up attract basic customs duty at 5 percent.
As against this, melting scrap of iron or steel attracts basic customs duty at 2.5
percent. I propose to rationalize the duty on ship breaking scrap and melting
scrap of iron or steel by reducing the basic customs duty on ships imported for
breaking up from 5 percent to 2.5 percent.

224. Semi-processed, half cut or broken diamonds are presently exempt from
basic customs duty. As against this, cut and polished diamonds and coloured
gemstones attract basic customs duty of 2 percent. To prevent mis-use and avoid
assessment disputes, the basic customs duty on semi-processed, half cut or broken
diamonds, cut and polished diamonds and coloured gemstones is being
rationalized at 2.5 percent. To encourage exports, pre-forms of precious and
semi-precious stones are being fully exempted from basic customs duty.

225. To encourage exports of readymade garments I propose to increase the
duty free entitlement for import of trimmings, embellishments and other specified
items from 3 percent to 5 percent of the value of their exports.

226. Considering the need to conserve our natural resources, I propose to
increase the export duty on bauxite from 10 percent to 20 percent.

227. The free baggage allowance under the baggage rules was last revised in
2012. As a measure of passenger facilitation, I propose to increase the free baggage
allowance from ` 35,000 to ` 45,000.

228. I shall now deal with excise duties.

229. To provide a fillip to the capital goods, consumer durables and automobile
sectors, and given our commitment to revive economic growth, I have already
extended the excise duty concessions beyond 30th June 2014 for a period of 6
months up to 31st December 2014. We expect the industry to show positive
results in the coming months.

230. In continuation, I have a few more proposals to boost domestic production.
Minimization of harvest and post harvest losses of agricultural produce is an
important measure for tackling food inflation and ensuring food security. The

 40
losses in fruits and vegetables are mainly due to lack of adequate processing
capacity. To incentivize expansion of processing capacity, I propose to reduce
the excise duty on specified food processing and packaging machinery from 10
percent to 6 percent.

231. As a measure of relief to the footwear industry, most of which are in
SME sector, I propose to reduce the excise duty from 12 percent to 6 percent on
footwear of retail price exceeding ` 500 per pair but not exceeding ` 1,000 per
pair. Footwear of retail price up to ` 500 per pair will continue to remain exempted.

232. I propose to withdraw the concessional excise duty (2 percent without
Cenvat benefit and 6 percent with Cenvat benefit) on smart cards and levy a
uniform excise duty at 12 percent. Consequently, imports will attract higher CVD.
This will help domestic industry.

233. To develop renewable sources of energy, I propose to exempt from excise
duty:
 • EVA sheets and solar back sheets and specified inputs used in their
 manufacture;
 • solar tempered glass used in the manufacture of solar photovoltaic
 cells and modules;
 • flat copper wire for the manufacture of PV ribbons for use in solar
 cells and modules;
 • machinery and equipment required for setting up of a project for
 solar energy production;
 • forged steel rings used in the manufacture of bearings of wind
 operated generators;
 • machinery and equipment required for setting up of compressed
 biogas plants (Bio-CNG).

234. To set at rest an on-going dispute, I propose to exempt PSF and PFY
manufactured from plastic waste and scrap including PET bottles from excise
duty with effect from 29th June, 2010 to 7th May, 2012. I also propose to levy
prospectively a nominal duty of 2 percent without Cenvat benefit and 6 percent
with Cenvat benefit on such PSF and PFY.

235. To encourage sports, I propose to prescribe a concessional excise duty of
2 percent without Cenvat benefit and 6 percent with Cenvat benefit on sports
gloves.

 41
236. While undertaking all these measures, I also need to mobilize resources.
Accordingly, I propose to increase the specific excise duty on cigarettes in the
range of 11 percent to 72 percent. Similar increases are proposed on cigars,
cheroots and cigarillos. Likewise, the excise duty is being increased from 12
percent to 16 percent on pan masala, from 50 percent to 55 percent on
unmanufactured tobacco and from 60 percent to 70 percent on gutkha and chewing
tobacco. I also propose to levy an additional duty of excise at 5 percent on aerated
waters containing added sugar. These are healthy measures and I hope everyone
would welcome them from the point of view of human and fiscal health.

237. Clean Energy Cess is presently levied on coal, peat and lignite for the
purposes of financing and promoting clean energy initiatives and funding research
in the area of clean energy. I propose to expand the scope of purposes of levying
the said cess to include financing and promoting clean environment initiatives
and funding research in the area of clean environment. To finance these additional
initiatives, I propose to increase the Clean Energy Cess from ` 50 per tonne to
`100 per tonne.

238. I shall now deal with service tax.

239. In recent times, among indirect taxes, service tax has shown the highest
rate of growth. Since my overall objective is to prepare the indirect tax regime
for a smooth transition to Goods and Services Tax, changes have been kept
minimal at this stage. The twin objectives in this sector of indirect taxes are to
widen the tax base and enhance compliance. My proposals in relation to Service
Tax are in line with these objectives.

240. To broaden the tax base in Service Tax, it is necessary to prune the negative
list and exemptions to the extent possible. Accordingly, the negative list has
been reviewed and service tax leviable currently, on sale of space or time for
advertisements in broadcast media, is being extended to cover such sales on
other segments like online and mobile advertising. Sale of space for
advertisements in print media however would remain excluded from service
tax. Similarly, tax is being proposed on the service provided by radio-taxis to
place them on par with rent-a-cab service. These new levies will come into effect
from a date to be notified after the passing of the Finance Bill.

241. In furtherance of the effort to broaden the tax base, certain exemptions
are being withdrawn, including those extended to services by air-conditioned
contract carriages and technical testing of newly developed drugs on human
participants.

242. To spur growth in certain sectors, I have tried to correct the bottlenecks
which have been brought to my knowledge. Indian shipping industry had been

 42
representing that they are losing business in a tough global scenario, due to a
provision in the Place of Provision of Services Rules, which is now being
addressed through an amendment. Similarly, to encourage growth in the transport
of goods through coastal vessels, the tax incidence is being reduced. In response
to the request of the tourism sector, services provided by Indian tour operators
to foreign tourists in relation to a tour wholly conducted outside India is being
taken out of the tax net. A long standing demand of this sector has been to allow
Cenvat credit for services of rent-a-cab and tour operators. I now propose to
allow credit in the same line of business.

243. I had to accept a few requests for exemptions from the social sector,
since exemption-induced distortion would be comparatively less in such sectors.
At the request of the Ministry of Agriculture, service tax on loading, unloading,
storage, warehousing and transportation of cotton, whether ginned or baled, is
being exempted to bring it on par with certain other agricultural produce. Services
provided by the Employees’ State Insurance Corporation for the period prior to
1st July 2012 is being exempted.

244. For the benefit of the common man, the exemption presently available
for specified micro insurance schemes is being expanded to cover all life micro-
insurance schemes where the sum assured does not exceed ` 50,000 per life
insured. Since taxes should not come in the way of safe disposal of medical and
clinical wastes, services provided by common bio-medical waste treatment
facilities are being exempted.

245. Certain changes are also proposed for bringing about greater clarity and
for reducing litigation regarding the scope of exemptions. These include functions
ordinarily entrusted to a municipality and services in relation to education.

246. There are a few more decisions which entail small gains or losses of
revenue. Certain amendments are also being proposed in the Customs and Central
Excise Acts and in the Finance Act, 1994 relating to service tax. These changes
are reflected in the budget documents.

247. My tax proposals on the indirect taxes side are estimated to yield ` 7,525
crore.

248. I have some more proposals which are in the nature of facilitating trade
and resolving disputes. I shall highlight only a few.

249. Faster clearance of import and export cargo reduces transaction costs
and improves business competitiveness. To help achieve these objectives,
measures are being initiated to extend the existing 24x7 customs clearance facility

 43
to 13 more airports in respect of all export goods and to 14 more sea ports in
respect of specified import and export goods.

250. It is also proposed to implement an ‘Indian Customs Single Window
Project’ to facilitate trade. Under this, importers and exporters would lodge their
clearance documents at a single point only. Required permissions, if any, from
other regulatory agencies would be obtained online without the trader having to
approach these agencies. This would reduce interface with Governmental
agencies, dwell time and the cost of doing business.

251. The scheme of Advance Ruling in indirect taxes is being expanded to
cover resident private limited companies. This will allow these companies to
seek advance ruling in respect of new activities being proposed to be undertaken
by them. The scope of Settlement Commission is being enlarged to facilitate
quick dispute resolution.

252. To expedite the process of disposal of appeals, amendments have been
proposed in the Customs and Central Excise Acts with a view to freeing appellate
authorities from hearing stay applications and to take up regular appeals for final
disposal.

253. Madam Speaker, with these words I commend the Budget to the House.

