 1 4 5 . I now come to the tax proposals proper. What I describe below are the
major changes proposed, not every detail of change, apart from those already described
in the portion dealing with specific sectors. Details are contained in the Finance Bill
and the relevant notifications, which will be laid on the Table of the House in due
course. Moreover, as the Hon’ble Members are aware, Budget Day restrictions in
respect of clearance of goods have been revoked to allow economic activity to continue
without any hindrance.

 Direct taxes
 Rates
 1 4 6 . Rates of income tax, both corporate and non-corporate, have remained
largely stable since 1997. As stability and continuity are commended as virtues in
tax regimes, I intend to be virtuous. Corporate tax structure will, therefore, be left as
it is; except that the 5 per cent surcharge, levied last year in connection with the
security of India, will be halved in the case of corporate assessees, firms, foreign
companies, cooperatives, and local authorities. In the case of individuals, Hindu
Undivided Families (HUF), and Association of Persons etc., this surcharge will be
removed entirely, except in the case of those earning an income above Rs.8.5 lakhs.
From them, that is those earning above Rs.8.5 lakh, I will collect a 10 per cent surcharge
on the tax, which works out to less than 3 paise out of an income of a rupee. But, I
have provided some relief to them, as well, for example, in standard deduction.

 Standard deduction
 1 4 7 . There are more salaried taxpayers at income levels of Rs.2 lakh and above
than the non-salaried. I do often wonder, why? That is why the salaried always
complain, saying they do not have – that cliché phrase – a level playing field; I agree,
they do suffer a more exacting regime. Therefore, as already announced, their standard
deductions are raised.
 1 4 8 . Individual taxpayers having income from dividends, interest, etc. are given
a general deduction of Rs.9,000. As promised by me earlier, this deduction has now
been increased to Rs.12,000. An additional deduction of Rs.3,000 is allowable in
respect of interest from Government securities. Thus, the total deduction available
under Section 80L will be Rs.15,000. Though dividend will not be taxable in the
hands of the recipient from next year, I propose to retain this deduction at Rs.15,000
for next year also.

 Tax deduction at source
 1 4 9 . A lot of unintended difficulties are caused by certain provisions dealing
with tax deductible at source (TDS); much too tedious to elaborate here. I want to
correct this. Therefore, in simple terms, it is now provided that individuals and HUF
carrying on business or profession need not deduct tax at source, from payments
made by them for personal purposes.

 26
 Not ordinarily resident
 1 5 0 . There is a category of taxpayers in India ordinarily not found elsewhere –
the ‘not ordinarily resident’. They do not normally have to pay tax on their foreign
sourced income. There has been confusion on this provision in the past due to
differing legal interpretations. To set matters at rest, the relevant definition has
been suitably amended so that the benefit will now be available to persons for two
years in case they remain non-residents for the last nine out of 10 years.

 Administrative reform
 1 5 1 . In the area of tax administration, Government has initiated a whole basket
of reforms, mainly on the basis of the recommendations of the Kelkar Committee.
Some of the principal ones are:
 (a) outsourcing of non-core activities of Income Tax Department, namely
 allotment of PAN, and creation of data bank of high value transactions
 through tax information network;
 (b) immediate abolition of present discretion-based system for selection of
 returns for scrutiny; this will be replaced by a computer generated,
 intelligent, random selection of only 2 per cent of the returns, annually;
 (c) expanding the scope of taxpayer services, including extension of interactive
 voice response system to more cities and software for preparation of returns;
 (d) direct crediting of all refunds to the bank account of the taxpayer, through
 electronic clearance system; but obviously only if the taxpayer furnishes a
 bank account number;
 (e) reduce the compliance cost of the taxpayer, through halving the number of
 forms presently used in furnishing of applications, returns, etc., for the
 purposes of tax deduction and tax collection at source, from the present 42
 to just 22. Hon’ble Members, if in only one attempt I could halve this headache,
 please reflect upon the immense possibilities that lie on this route;
 (f) immediate introduction of a one-page only return form for individual tax
 payers, having income from salary, house property and interest, etc. This
 has already been devised, and will come into operation from April 1 onwards;
 (g) the Income Tax Act is being amended to enable electronic filing of returns;
 (h) abolition of tax-clearance certificates currently needed by a person leaving
 India, or any person submitting a tender for a government contract.
 Henceforth, only expatriates who come to India in connection with business,
 profession or employment, would have to furnish a guarantee from their
 employer, etc. in respect of the tax payable before they leave India. An
 Indian citizen, before leaving India, will only have to give his/her permanent
 account number, and the period of his/her intended visit abroad to the
 emigration authorities; and
 (i) simplifying the procedure and methods employed during search and seizure,
 and during survey by the Income Tax department. First, hereafter, stocks
 found during the course of a search and seizure operation will not be seized
 under any circumstances. Second, no confession shall be obtained during
 such search and seizure operations. Third, no survey operation will be

 27
 authorized by an officer below the rank of Joint Commissioner of Income
 Tax. Finally, books of account impounded during survey will not be retained
 beyond ten days, without the prior approval of the Chief Commissioner.
 1 5 2 . These, Hon’ble Members, are only a few steps on this long road called
simplification and rationalisation of taxation. It is not for nothing that even Albert
Einstein had ruefully observed that he found ‘Income Tax the most difficult thing
upon Earth to understand’.
 1 5 3 . Mr. Speaker, please sympathize with me. I endeavour to make easy that
which Einstein found so difficult.

 Indirect taxes: excise
 Rationalisation and relief
 1 5 4 . Rationalisation of excise rate structure and reduction of the multiplicity of
rates are integral to the total tax reform process. In this regard, I propose to prescribe
a 3-tier excise duty structure of 8 per cent, 16 per cent and 24 per cent. These rates
would, however, not apply in the case of petroleum and tobacco products, pan masala,
and items attracting specific duty rates. I have already announced a separate package
for textiles, and some changes in the duty structure relevant for some other key
sectors while dealing with those sectors. I will now refer to the changes proposed in
various other commodities.
 1 5 5 . Currently, tyres, aerated soft drinks, polyester filament yarn, air-
conditioners and motor cars attract excise duty of 32 per cent. I propose to reduce
the duty on these items to 24 per cent.
 1 5 6 . Certain exempt items were brought under the tax net during the last two
years with an optional duty of 4 per cent without CENVAT, or 16 per cent with
CENVAT. I propose to eliminate the 4 per cent duty without CENVAT. However, keeping
in view the number of representations received for exemptions, I propose to fully
exempt the following items of the ordinary citizen’s use, currently attracting 4 per
cent excise duty:
 ♦ Unbranded surgical bandages
 ♦ Registers and account books
 ♦ Umbrellas
 ♦ Kerosene pressure lanterns
 ♦ Articles of wood
 ♦ Imitation zari
 ♦ Adhesive tapes
 ♦ Tubular knitted gas mantle fabrics
 ♦ Walking sticks
 ♦ Articles of mica
 ♦ Bicycles and parts

 28
 ♦ To y s
 ♦ Mosaic tiles
 ♦ Utensils and kitchen articles
 ♦ Knives, spoons and similar kitchenware/tableware
 ♦ Glasses for corrective spectacles
 1 5 7 . Rest of the items attracting 4 per cent without CENVAT will now attract
duty at 8 per cent with CENVAT.
 1 5 8 . I also propose to fully exempt from excise duty matches made by the non-
mechanized sector. However, matches made by semi-mechanized and mechanized
sector will attract an ad-valorem duty of 8 per cent without CENVAT.
 1 5 9 . I also propose to reduce the excise duty chargeable under the Medicinal
and Toilet Preparations Act, on medicines and toilet preparations containing alcohol,
from the present high rates of 20 to 50 per cent to a uniform rate of 16 per cent, at
par with the rates on similar items not containing alcohol. However, exemptions on
ayurvedic and unani medicines, containing self-generated alcohol, will continue.
 1 6 0 . I propose to reduce the excise duty on items like pressure cookers,
ophthalmic blanks, biscuits, boiled sweets and dental chairs from 16 per cent to 8
per cent. Recorded audio compact discs (CDs) will be fully exempt from excise duty.
 1 6 1 . It is my conviction, Mr. Speaker, that these measures will result in “Grihini
ki tukia mein anna”: the second part of my assurance.

 Transpor t
 1 6 2 . As I have earlier stated, efficient transportation is critical for rapid
development. I have already announced major reduction in excise duty on motor
cars and tyres. Further, on environmental considerations, I propose to reduce the
duty on electric vehicles from 16 per cent to 8 per cent.
 1 6 3 . Presently, there is an inequitous duty structure between buses and trucks,
manufactured by an integrated unit, vis-à-vis independent body builders, who are
exempt from excise duty. To reduce the duty differential and to promote body building
by integrated bus and truck manufacturers, as a measure of road safety, I propose
to increase the duty on chassis from 16 per cent, to 16 per cent plus Rs.10,000 per
chassis, cleared for outside body building. The body building activity in the
unorganized sector would, however, continue to remain exempt.
 1 6 4 . It is an accepted principle that while taxation should be moderate, the tax
base has to be large, so that every sector contributes moderately to the national
economy. Following this principle, I propose to impose fresh excise levy of 8 per cent
on the following items, with the CENVAT credit facility available to them: branded
refined edible oil and vanaspati packed in sealed containers for retail sale – this will
not apply to unbranded oil; lay flat tubing; chemical reagents; wood-free particle or
fibre board made from agro base; paper and paper board made from non conventional
raw material; and populated printed circuit board for black and white TV sets.
 1 6 5 . Considering that specific rates on cement and clinker have remained
unchanged for a considerably long period of time, I propose to now increase these

 29
rates by Rs.50 per tonne. This will mean a modest increase of Rs.2.50 per 50 kg.
bag of cement.
 1 6 6 . I also propose to impose additional excise duty of Rs.1.50 per litre on light
diesel oil to further discourage its use as an adulterant.

 Trade facilitation measures
 1 6 7 . For trade facilitation, I propose to take the following measures,-
 (a) The present system of fortnightly payment of excise duty will be liberalized
 to permit payment of duty at the end of the month. Further, the excise duty
 will be considered to have been paid on the date the cheque is presented to
 the bank subject to realisation.
 (b) Deduction from the transaction value is allowed on actual freight incurred,
 provided that is clearly shown in the invoice. This facility will now be
 extended to cases where freight is worked out on an equalized basis also.
 (c) Over the years, the Maximum Retail Price (MRP) based excise levy has
 proved to be an effective measure of simplification by reducing valuation
 disputes. I propose to extend the MRP-based excise levy to chewing tobacco
 and insecticides.
 National Calamity Contingency Fund
 1 6 8 . Unfortunately, the Nation has been facing a severe drought this year. The
funds raised earlier under the National Calamity Contingent Duty are not sufficient.
It is, therefore, proposed to impose a 1 per cent National Calamity Contingent
Duty on polyester filament yarn, motor cars, multi utility vehicles and two-wheelers.
Similarly, crude, domestic or imported, will also be subjected to a duty of Rs.50
per metric tonne for this purpose. However, these new levies will be limited to one
year only.
 1 6 9 . While the Small Scale Exemption Scheme aims at providing a distinctive
advantage to labour-intensive units, there are reports of misuse of this facility in
certain sectors. I propose to withdraw this facility in case of a few items and rationalize
the eligibility limit of Rs.3 crore under the general SSI scheme.

 Service tax
 1 7 0 . I propose to enhance the general service tax rate from 5 per cent to 8 per
cent, and also impose service tax on 10 new services. While the increase in the tax
rates will come into effect on enactment of the Finance Bill, the levy of tax on the
new services will take effect from a date to be notified.
 1 7 1 . Last year credit of service tax on input services were extended for payment
of service tax, provided the input and the final services fell within the same category.
I propose to extend this facility across all services. Thus, the credit will now be
available even if the input and the final services fall under different categories.

 Indirect taxes: customs
 External liberalisation
 1 7 2 . Rate rationalisation and reduction of peak rates of customs duties has
been an integral part of economic reform in the country. The economy has not only

 30
‘weathered’ the removal of quantitative restrictions on imports and the reduction in
customs duty rates, but has responded by improving its competitiveness and
demonstrating the inherent strength of its external balance of payments. As a part
of this continuous process, and in line with the pronouncements made by several of
my predecessors, I now propose to reduce the peak rate of customs duty from 30 per
cent to 25 per cent, excluding agriculture and dairy products.

 Rationalisation and relief
 1 7 3 . It has been our policy to minimize sector-specific and end-use based customs
duty exemptions. This policy will continue. Metallurgical coke and nickel attract
customs duty rates at 15 per cent and 5 per cent, depending upon their usage. I,
therefore, propose to rationalize the customs duty on these two items to a uniform
rate of 10 per cent.
 1 7 4 . Conch shells and seed lac are really handicraft items. Their duty will come
down from 30 per cent – why was it ever 30 per cent – to 5 per cent.
 1 7 5 . Import duty on oleo pine resin, a raw material for rosin shall be reduced
from 15 per cent to 10 per cent.
 1 7 6 . Value limit for a full customs duty exemption, for bona fide commercial
samples and gifts, however, shall be raised from Rs.5,000 to Rs.10,000.
 1 7 7 . I also propose to reduce the customs duty on passenger baggage from 60
per cent to 50 per cent.
 1 7 8 . Phosphoric acid, an input for fertilizers, is exempt from the Special Additional
Duty of Customs (SAD). For the sake of uniformity, I propose to exempt rock phosphate
and crude sulphur, inputs for phosphoric acid, also from SAD.
 1 7 9 . The basic customs duty on alcoholic liquor will come down to 166 per cent
in conformity with our WTO commitments. I also propose to rationalize the
countervailing duty in respect of imported alcoholic beverages including wines.

 Capital goods and infrastructure
 1 8 0 . Considering higher usage levels of Liquified Natural Gas (LNG),
I propose to reduce the customs duty on LNG regassification plants from 25 per cent
to 5 per cent.
 1 8 1 . There is need to support cleaner and environment-friendly technologies.
With this end in view, I propose to reduce the customs duty on components of
membrane cell technology used in the caustic soda industry from 15 per cent to
5 per cent.
 1 8 2 . Safety and modernisation are key issues before Indian Railways. I propose,
therefore, to reduce customs duty on spares for diesel locomotives, parts for conversion
of locomotives from DC to AC from 25 per cent to 15 per cent, and loco simulators
for training of drivers from 25 per cent to 5 per cent.
 1 8 3 . Given the importance of promoting food-processing and transporting
agricultural products, I propose to reduce the customs duty on refrigerated trucks
from 25 per cent to 20 per cent.

 31
 Trade facilitation
 1 8 4 . I assure Hon’ble Members of faster clearance hereafter of cargo and fewer
procedures, by reducing the transaction cost, thus facilitating exports and imports.
For this, a number of measures have been taken to simplify and modernize the
customs clearance procedures, with the main emphasis being on cutting down contact
of trade with the officers, to the extent possible, and introducing computerisation in
customs clearances. While these efforts will continue, as a further trade facilitation
measure, I propose to increase the interest-free period for warehoused goods from
30 to 90 days and to reduce the rate of interest for the period beyond 90 days to
reflect the market rate of interest.
 1 8 5 . To bring our customs clearance procedures at par with best international
practices, I propose to introduce, this year itself, a self-assessment scheme for
importers and exporters. Briefly stated, under the self-assessment scheme, the
importer himself/herself will determine the classification of goods, including claim
for any exemption benefit, and the system will calculate the duty based on his/her
declaration. Physical inspection of imported goods will be done by using risk-
assessment and management techniques on a computer-based system and not on
the orders of customs examining staff. Further, the existing system of concurrent
audit of import documents will be replaced by post-clearance audit, as prevalent in
developed countries.
 1 8 6 . Sir, my proposals made in this budget on the Direct Taxes will result in a
revenue loss of Rs.2,955 crore while the proposals relating to indirect taxes will
result in a gain of Rs.3294 crore.

 Revised Estimates for 2002-2003
 1 8 7 . The revised estimates for the current fiscal year show a decrease in
expenditure of Rs.6,296 crore as compared to the Budget estimates. This reduction
in overall expenditure has been achieved despite additional expenditure on drought
relief, food subsidy, and the Delhi Metro Rail Project.
 1 8 8 . Net tax revenues for the Centre are estimated to be Rs.164,177 crore
compared to the Budget estimate of Rs.172,965 crore, thereby reflecting a shortfall
of Rs.8,788 crore. Non tax revenue is estimated at Rs.72,759 crore, Rs.619 crore
more than the estimated level of Rs.72,140 crore. However, disinvestment receipts,
at Rs.3,360 crore are lower than the Budget estimate of Rs.12,000 crore.

 Budget Estimates for 2003-2004
 1 8 9 . In the budget estimates for 2003-2004, the total expenditure is estimated
at Rs.438,795 crore, of which Rs.120,974 crore is for Plan and Rs.317,821 crore
for non-Plan.

 Plan expenditure
 1 9 0 . In order to strike the right balance between the developmental needs on
one hand and fiscal stability on the other, the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) for
Plan 2003-04 has been fixed at Rs.120,974 crore. This is Rs.7,474 crore more than
last year, indicating an increase of 6.6 per cent. Out of this, an amount of Rs.72,152
crore is being provided as Budget support for Central Plan. This is an increase of

 32
Rs.5,281 crore, or 7.9 per cent, over the last year. Similarly, the Central Assistance
for State Plans has been pegged at Rs.48,822 crore, which is Rs.2,193 crore more
than last year.

 Non-plan Expenditure
 1 9 1 . Non-Plan expenditure in 2003-2004 is estimated to be Rs.317,821 crore
compared to Rs.289,924 crore in Revised estimates for 2002-2003. The increase in
non-plan expenditure is mainly in interest payments (Rs.7,560 crore), subsidies
(Rs.7,162 crore), and defence (Rs.9,300 crore). Government is fully committed to
modernizing the armed forces, and equipping them with the best available. This is
non-negotiable. Therefore, during the next year, any additional requirement that
may emerge on account of modernisation needs of the three defence services, or on
account of the Married Accommodation Project, will be fully met. There will be no
shortage of funds for defence.

 Revenue estimate and Fiscal deficit
 1 9 2 . Mr. Speaker, Sir, with these proposals I estimate total revenue receipts of
the Centre at Rs.253,935 crore and the fiscal deficit at Rs.153,637 crore, which is
5.6 per cent of the estimated GDP.

 XI. CONCLUSION
 1 9 3 . Sir, in formulating the Budget for 2003-04, the Government has had to
carefully and delicately balance the need for accelerating growth, while simultaneously
making progress on the front of fiscal consolidation. I know that what Government
has done is the most judicious under the circumstances.
 1 9 4 . This budget is about addressing the problem of poverty and life-time
concerns of our citizens; of giving a major boost to infrastructure; and laying the
foundations for balanced, accelerated growth of agriculture and industry, plus tax
reform. I have tried to address the ‘Panch Priorities’, and I hope, that after this year
of drought, our economy will respond favourably to the Budget package and
demonstrate impressive growth in 2003-04.
 1 9 5 . Let me end, Mr. Speaker, by reiterating that this Budget is of an “India that
is on the move.” An India, that now rapidly advances to prosperity. It is about an
India that banishes poverty, and builds on its great resource base, the strength of its
human capital and the immense reservoir of its knowledge.
 1 9 6 . Sir, I commend the Budget to the House.

