 Part - B

XIII. TAX PROPOSALS
122. Mr. Speaker, I shall now present my tax proposals.
123. The UPA Government promised that "tax rates will be stable and
conducive to growth, compliance and investment". The increase in gross tax
revenue is proof of a promise fulfilled. While we have raised more tax revenue,
we have also left more money in the hands of the people as savings and for
investment.
124. Gross tax revenue has grown by 19.9 per cent, 20.0 per cent and 27.8 per
cent in the first three years of this Government. The tax to GDP ratio has increased
from 9.2 per cent in 2003-04 to 11.4 per cent in 2006-07. We intend to keep our
tax rates moderate and stable and administer the tax laws in a tax payer-friendly
manner.
Indirect Taxes
125. I shall begin with indirect taxes. Firstly, customs duties.
126. In January 2007, Government announced wide ranging reductions in
tariffs. Import duties on capital goods, project imports, metals and specified
inorganic chemicals were reduced by 2.5 percentage points and, in some cases,
by 5 percentage points. Duties on some edible oils were reduced by 10 to 12.5
percentage points.
127. In order to take one more step towards comparable East Asian rates, I
propose to reduce the peak rate for non-agricultural products from 12.5 per cent
to 10 per cent.
128. I propose to reduce the duties on most chemicals and plastics from 12.5
per cent to 7.5 per cent.
129. The duty on prime steel is 5 per cent. Seconds and defectives augment
supply. Keeping in mind the need for a differential, I propose to reduce the duty
on seconds and defectives of steel from 20 per cent to 10 per cent.
130. I propose to fully exempt from duty all coking coal irrespective of the
ash content.
131. Last year, I reduced the excise duty on all man-made fibres and yarns
from 16 per cent to 8 per cent. To further encourage this industry, I propose to
reduce the customs duty on polyester fibres and yarns from 10 per cent to 7.5 per
cent. Consequently, the customs duty on raw-materials such as DMT, PTA and
MEG will also be reduced from 10 per cent to 7.5 per cent.
132. Another industry that is a growth- and employment- driver is gem and
jewellery. I propose to bring down the duty on cut and polished diamonds from

 23
5 per cent to 3 per cent; on rough synthetic stones from 12.5 per cent to 5 per
cent; and on unworked corals from 30 per cent to 10 per cent.

133. I propose to fully exempt dredgers from import duty.

134. To augment irrigation facilities and processing of agricultural products, I
propose to reduce the duty on drip irrigation systems, agricultural sprinklers and
food processing machinery from 7.5 per cent to 5 per cent.

135. While specified medical equipment attract a concessional duty of 5 per
cent, other equipment are taxed at 12.5 per cent. I propose to bring down the
general rate of import duty on medical equipment to 7.5 per cent.

136. In order to make edible oils more affordable, I propose to exempt crude
as well as refined edible oils from the additional CV duty of 4 per cent. I also
propose to reduce the duty on sunflower oil, both crude and refined, by 15
percentage points.

137. I have good news for cat and dog lovers. I propose to reduce the duty on
pet foods from 30 per cent to 20 per cent.

138. I propose to reduce the duty on watch dials and movements as well as
umbrella parts from 12.5 per cent to 5 per cent.

139. In order to promote research and development, I propose to extend the
concessional rate of 5 per cent duty available to public funded research institutions
to all research institutions registered with the Directorate of Scientific and
Industrial Research. For the pharmaceutical and biotechnology sector, I propose
to reduce the duty on 15 specified machinery from 7.5 per cent to 5 per cent.

140. Import of aircraft, including helicopters, by Government and scheduled
airlines is, at present, exempt from all duties, and that position will continue.
However, there is no reason to allow the exemption to other private importers.
Hence, I propose to levy an import duty of 3 per cent, which is the WTO bound
rate, on all private import of aircraft including helicopters. Such import will also
attract countervailing duty and additional customs duty.

141. The Hoda Committee has submitted a report on mineral policy. Taking a
leaf out of the report, and in order to conserve our natural resources as well as to
raise revenue, I propose to impose an export duty of Rs.300 per metric tonne on
export of iron ores and concentrates and Rs.2,000 per metric tonne on export of
chrome ores and concentrates.

142. I shall now turn to my proposals on excise duties and service tax.

143. There will be no change in the general CENVAT rate or in the service tax
rate.

 24
144. On February 15, 2007, Government reduced the price of petrol and diesel
by Rs.2 per litre and Re.1 per litre, respectively. I had agreed that the Revenue
will bear a part of the burden. Hence, I propose to reduce the ad valorem
component of excise duty on petrol and diesel from 8 per cent to 6 per cent.
145. Keeping in mind the special needs of several sectors and the interest of
the consumers, I propose to grant relief from excise duty in deserving cases,
especially job creating sectors:
 • I propose to raise the exemption limit for small scale industry (SSI)
 from Rs.1 crore to Rs.1.5 crore.
 • The food processing sector is poised to achieve high growth.
 Concessions were extended last year to several items of food. This
 year, I propose to fully exempt from excise duty biscuits whose retail
 sale price does not exceed Rs.50 per kilogram. I also propose to
 fully exempt from excise duty all kinds of food mixes including
 instant mixes. I can no longer be accused of being partial to idli and
 dosa mixes.
 • I propose to reduce excise duty on umbrellas and parts of footwear
 from 16 per cent to 8 per cent.
 • Plywood helps to save wood. Hence, I propose to reduce excise duty
 on plywood from 16 per cent to 8 per cent.
 • Biodiesel will greatly reduce our dependence on fossil fuels. Hence,
 I propose to fully exempt biodiesel from excise duty.
146. To provide access to pure drinking water for households and communities,
I propose to fully exempt from excise duty water purification devices operating
on specified membrane based technologies as well as domestic water filters not
using electricity.
147. Pipes used for carrying water from a water supply plant to a storage facility
are exempt from excise duty. I propose to extend the exemption to all pipes of
diameter exceeding 200 mm used in water supply systems.
148. There has been a significant increase in the retail price of cement. Last
year, at this time, a bag of 50 kilogram was sold at a Maximum Retail Price
(MRP) of Rs.190 or less which, I understand, is a remunerative price. I propose
to reward cement manufacturers who hold the price line and tax those who do
not. Accordingly, I propose to reduce the present rate of excise duty of Rs.400
per metric tonne to Rs.350 per metric tonne on cement which is sold in retail at
not more than Rs.190 per bag. On cement that has a higher MRP, the excise duty
will be Rs.600 per metric tonne.
149. I strongly support the campaign "say no to tobacco". Hence, I propose to
increase the specific rates of excise duty on cigarettes by about 5 per cent.
Similarly, excise duty (excluding cess) on biris, which was last fixed in 2001,

 25
will be raised from Rs.7 to Rs.11 per thousand for non-machine made biris and
from Rs.17 to Rs.24 per thousand for machine made biris. There is an exemption
from excise duty for unbranded biris up to 20 lakh biris in a year. Complaints
have been received of misuse of the exemption. This exemption will henceforth
be available subject to fulfilment of the condition of declaration with the
Department of Central Excise and regular monitoring.
150. Pan masala containing tobacco will continue to bear an excise duty of 66
per cent. However, in the case of pan masala not containing tobacco, the duty
will be reduced from 66 per cent to 45 per cent. I also propose to withdraw the
exemption for pan masala containing tobacco and other tobacco products that is
now given to units in the North Eastern States.
151. Based on a comprehensive review of exemptions and having posted them
on the website and having invited comments, I propose to remove certain excise
duty exemptions which are redundant or have outlived their utility.
152. I propose to raise the exemption limit for small service providers from
Rs.400,000 to Rs.800,000. Consequently, 200,000 assessees out of a total of
400,000 assessees will go out of the service tax net. The revenue loss will be
Rs.800 crore, but I am happy to give away this sum in the interest of the small
service provider and the consumer.
153. While I bid goodbye to 200,000 assessees, I welcome the new assessees
who will be brought into the fold. I propose to extend service tax to:
 • Services outsourced for mining of mineral, oil or gas;
 • Renting of immovable property for use in commerce or business;
 however, residential properties, vacant land used for agriculture and
 similar purposes, land for sports, entertainment and parking purposes,
 and immovable property for educational or religious purposes will
 be excluded;
 • Development and supply of content for use in telecom and advertising
 purposes;
 • Asset management services provided by individuals; and
 • Design services.
154. State Governments levy a tax on the transfer of property in goods involved
in the execution of a works contract. The value of services in a works contract
should attract service tax. Hence, I propose to levy service tax on services involved
in the execution of a works contract. However, I also propose an optional
composition scheme under which service tax will be levied at only 2 per cent of
the total value of the works contract.
155. I propose to exempt service tax on services provided by Resident Welfare
Associations to their members who contribute Rs.3000 or less per month for
services rendered.

 26
156. In order to encourage innovation, I propose to exempt from service tax
all services provided by technology business incubators. Similarly, their
incubatees whose annual business turnover does not exceed Rs.50 lakhs will be
exempt from service tax for the first three years.
157. To make India a preferred destination for drug testing, I propose to exempt
clinical trial of new drugs from service tax.
158. The scope of some services that are currently taxed is being expanded or
redefined. However, I shall not burden the House with the details.
159. The telecommunications industry has repeatedly requested that the
multifarious taxes, charges and fees applicable to the industry should be unified
and a single levy on revenue should be collected. The request merits consideration.
Hence, I propose to request the Department of Telecommunications to constitute
a committee to study the present structure of levies and make suitable
recommendations to Government.
Direct Taxes
160. I shall now move to direct taxes.
161. In the current year, there has been better tax compliance by individuals. I
hope this trend will continue.
162. The current slabs and rates of personal income tax (PIT) were introduced
only two years ago. They constitute a moderate tax regime. A comprehensive
review should await the proposed Income Tax code which will be introduced in
Parliament this year. Nevertheless, without altering the rates, I am inclined to
consider giving some relief to tax payers, especially in view of the cooperation
they have extended to the Department of Revenue. Accordingly, I propose that:
 • the threshold limit of exemption in the case of all assessees be
 increased by Rs.10,000, thus giving every assessee a relief of
 Rs.1,000;
 • consequently, in the case of a woman assessee, the threshold limit
 be increased from Rs.135,000 to Rs.145,000, giving her a relief of
 Rs.1,000;
 • the threshold limit of exemption in the case of a senior citizen be
 increased from Rs.185,000 to Rs.195,000, giving him or her a relief
 of Rs.2,000; and
 • the deduction in respect of medical insurance premium under section
 80D be increased to a maximum of Rs.15,000 and, in the case of a
 senior citizen, a maximum of Rs.20,000.

163. On the corporate income tax (CIT) side too, there has been better
compliance. Consequently, I propose to keep the same rate of CIT with one
important modification. In order to encourage small and medium enterprises to

 27
invest and grow, I propose to remove the surcharge on income tax on all firms
and companies with a taxable income of Rs.1 crore or less. This will benefit
about 1,200,000 firms and companies.

164. Profit-making cooperative banks, other than primary societies and primary
banks (i.e., PACs and PCARDBs), have been brought on par with other banks.
However, I have noticed some anomalies and I propose to correct them in the
interest of the cooperative banks. Accordingly, the benefit of Section 36(1)(viii)
will be available to cooperative banks. Likewise, cooperative banks will also be
allowed deduction in respect of provision for bad and doubtful debts under section
36(1)(viia). Amalgamation and de-merger of banking companies is tax neutral
and this benefit will be extended to cooperative banks.

165. Section 80IA of the Income Tax Act lists the infrastructure facilities that
are entitled to tax concessions. There are some obvious claimants to this benefit.
One is cross country natural gas distribution network, including gas pipeline and
storage facilities integrated to the network. The second is navigation channel in
the sea. I propose to extend the tax concession to these two facilities.

166. In order to facilitate the creation of urban infrastructure, I propose to
allow issue of tax-free bonds through State Pooled Finance Entities formed for
raising funds for a group of urban local bodies.

167. Last year, I had constituted an expert body to advise the Government on
tax policy in respect of the gem and jewellery industry. Taking into account its
recommendations, the best international practices and the need for a simple tax
regime, I propose to introduce a benign assessment procedure for assessees
engaged in diamond manufacturing and trading who declare profits from such
activities at 8 per cent or more of the turnover. Instructions in this regard will
issue shortly.

168. We will require 20,000 more hotel rooms for the Commonwealth Games.
Hence, I propose a five year holiday from income tax for two, three or four star
hotels as well as for convention centres with a seating capacity of not less than
3,000. They should be completed and begin operations in the National Capital
Territory of Delhi or in the adjacent districts of Faridabad, Gurgaon, Ghaziabad
or Gautam Budh Nagar during the period April 1, 2007 to March 31, 2010.

169. Section 35(2AB) allows a weighted deduction of 150 per cent for
expenditure relating to in-house research and development. I propose to extend
the concession for five more years until March 31, 2012.

170. Undertakings in Jammu & Kashmir presently enjoy a tax holiday that is
due to end on March 31, 2007. Considering the importance of promoting further
investment in that State, I propose to extend the benefit for another five years up
to March 31, 2012.

 28
171. E-filing of corporate returns introduced this financial year has been a
resounding success. Until January 31, 2007, 301,736 returns were electronically
filed by corporates. Our analysis shows that the effective rate of tax paid by all
corporates, thanks to numerous tax concessions and exemptions - several of
them well-intended - was only 19.2 per cent. In 1996-97, we introduced the
Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT) for companies with book profits, and its purpose
is to bring about horizontal equity in taxation. MAT should therefore apply, as
far as possible, to all corporate incomes. Hence, I propose to extend MAT to
income in respect of which deduction is claimed under sections 10A and 10B of
the Income Tax Act.

172. I also propose to partially modify a deduction that is available to certain
companies. Without altering the overall limit of the special reserve equal to twice
the net worth under section 36(1)(viii) of the Income Tax Act, I propose to stretch
out the period by restricting the deduction to 20 per cent of the profits each year
and limit the benefit to banks and certain financial corporations.

173. Venture capital funds are a useful source of risk capital, especially for
start-up ventures in the knowledge-intensive sectors. Since such funds enjoy a
pass-through status, it is necessary to limit the tax benefit to investments made
in truly deserving sectors. Accordingly, I propose to grant pass-through status to
venture capital funds only in respect of investments in venture capital undertakings
in biotechnology; information technology relating to hardware and software
development; nanotechnology; seed research and development; research and
development of new chemical entities in the pharmaceutical sector; dairy industry;
poultry industry; and production of bio-fuels. In order to promote business
tourism, I also propose to allow this benefit to venture capital funds that invest
in hotel-cum-convention centres of a certain description and size.

174. In December 2006, I put a limit of Rs.50 lakh per investor per year with
respect to capital gains bonds issued by NHAI and REC under section 54EC of
the Income Tax Act. As a result, many small investors could obtain these bonds
and save on capital gains. I propose to continue this provision and, accordingly,
I propose to amend section 54EC to that effect.

175. I propose to expand the tax base of capital gains to include certain works
of art.

176. I believe that my direct tax proposals have brought about more horizontal
equity. It is also necessary to improve vertical equity. Having regard to the capacity
to pay, I propose to raise the rate of dividend distribution tax from 12.5 per cent
to 15 per cent on dividends distributed by companies.

177. Dividends distributed by money market mutual funds and liquid mutual
funds enjoy concessional tax rates giving rise to huge arbitrage opportunities. I
propose to address this distortion by raising the dividend distribution tax on
dividends paid by such entities to 25 per cent for all investors.

 29
178. Fringe Benefit Tax (FBT) has now stabilized. I have received a few
representations regarding some aspects of sales promotion. Hence, I propose to
clarify the doubts by excluding expenditure on free samples as well as expenditure
on displays from the scope of FBT.

179. A number of companies provide fringe benefits to employees through
Employees' Stock Option Plan (ESOP). I propose to bring ESOPs under FBT.
The value of the fringe benefit will be determined, in accordance with a prescribed
method, on the date of exercise of the option.

180. The Banking Cash Transactions Tax (BCTT) continues to be an extremely
useful tool to track unaccounted monies and trace their source and destination. It
has led the Income Tax Department to many money laundering and hawala
transactions. Having regard to the experience gained, I propose to exclude cash
withdrawals by the Central and State Governments from the scope of BCTT.
Further, I propose to raise the exemption limit for individuals and HUFs from
Rs.25,000 to Rs.50,000. As other instruments become more effective, I think it
would be possible to review BCTT next year.

181. I have a proposal regarding the cess for education. While the cess of 2
per cent on all taxes to fund basic education will remain, I propose to levy an
additional cess of 1 per cent on all taxes to fund secondary education and higher
education and the expansion of capacity by 54 per cent for reservation for socially
and educationally backward classes.

182. Finally, there is a small matter which has large beneficial consequences.
In 2001, 'Aviation Turbine Fuel sold to turbo-prop aircraft' was included in the
list of declared goods under section 14 of the CST Act. Turbo-prop aircraft have
been replaced by new generation small aircraft which have taken air services to
smaller airports and to the remote parts of the country. Hence, I propose to amend
the provision to cover all small aircraft with maximum takeoff mass of less than
40,000 kgs operated by scheduled airlines.

183. Along with tax reforms, the Government has laid great emphasis on tax
administration. The cost of collection of taxes in India is among the lowest in the
world. A number of administrative goals have been set for 2007-08. These include
expanding the coverage of Annual Information Returns, extending the Refund
Banker System to more areas, extending the e-payment facility through more
banks, making electronic filing of returns mandatory for more categories of
assessees and creating new Large Tax Payer Units.

184. My tax proposals on direct taxes are estimated to yield a gain of Rs.3,000
crore. On the indirect taxes side, the proposals are revenue neutral.

 30
XIV. CONCLUSION
185. Mr. Speaker, Sir, our human and gender development indices are low not
because of high growth but because growth is not high enough. Faster economic
growth has given us, once again, the opportunity to unfurl the sails and catch the
wind. Without growth, I could not have given a new thrust to agriculture. I could
not have given relief to the small tax payer, the small service provider and to
small scale industry. I could not have promised 100,000 scholarships or 100,000
jobs for the physically challenged. I could not have promised a massive ground
water recharge programme or social security for rural landless households.

186. The UPA Government has delivered on the promise of savings and
investment, and will deliver on the promise of encouraging more savings and
translating the savings into more investment. It has delivered on the promise of
growth, and will deliver on the promise of making growth more inclusive. I
believe that, given a right mix of policies, the poor will benefit from growth that
is driven by savings and investment and that is more inclusive. As Dr. Muhammad
Yunus, the Nobel laureate, said, “Faster growth rate is essential for faster reduction
in poverty. There is no other trick to it.”

187. Sir, with these words, I commend the Budget to the House.

