 SPEECH OF SHRI S.B. CHAVAN MINISTER OF FINANCE
 INTRODUCTING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1989-90


Sir,
 1. I rise to present the Budget for the year 1989-90. The Budget is an
instrument for achieving the basic objectives of planned development which, broadly,
are growth, modernisation, self-reliance and social justice. In each of these areas, we
have made substantial progress. There are clear signs of an acceleration in the growth
rate of our economy during the eighties. The pace of modernisation, particularly in
industry and infrastructure has increased greatly because of the policies pursued by us
for the past few years. The movement towards self-reliance has been maintained by
the sustained growth in exports. And most important of all, our commitment to the
goals of social justice has been demonstrated in the major initiatives that we have
taken in anti-poverty and employment programmes and in the fulfilment of essential
needs. These long-term objectives provide the framework within which the Budget
for 1989-90 has been formulated.
 2. The Annual Budget has to pursue these long-term objectives within the
context of the short-term economic situation. The Economic Survey for the year
1988-89, which was laid on the Table of the House a few days ago, deals with the
economic situation in some detail. I will only highlight a few key points.
 3. The performance of the Indian economy in the past few years has shown
unmistakable features of strength. The first is the resilience of the economy when
confronted with the severe disruption caused by drought and floods. Last year, my
predecessor, when presenting the Budget, had referred to this and indicated that the
gross domestic product would grow perhaps by 1 to 2 per cent. I am happy to inform
the House that the latest estimates of economic performance in the drought year of
1987-88 indicate that, despite the drought, GDP grew by 3.6 per cent. This
commendable performance in a year of drought has been followed by vigorous growth
in the current year and we expect the GDP to grow by 9 per cent or more in real terms.
Both the rate of growth of GDP in the drought year and the pace of recovery in the
post-drought year, are significantly higher than those in earlier periods of drought. I
may add that the average growth rate of GDP in the first four years of the Plan will
exceed the Plan target of 5 per cent.
 4. The performance in the agricultural sector in these past two years gives
grounds for hope. Last year, despite the severe drought and floods, foodgrains
production was 138 million tonnes, only marginally lower than in the previous year,
showing that our policies to contain the impact of the drought were successful. This
 1

year, foodgrains production is expected to exceed the target of 166 million tonnes.
Oilseeds, cotton and sugar production are expected to reach record levels. The sector
continues to demonstrate a high potential for growth.
 5. The growth in output in a period of stress, the careful management of the
food economy by the Government, and the special measures taken to boost agricultural
production and provide relief to those affected by drought have ensured that inflation,
as measured by the Wholesale Price Index, was limited to 10.6 per cent in 1987-88.
The rate of inflation in the current year has been under 5 per cent up to the end of
January, 1989 Government is concerned about the pressure on prices, but it is a matter
of some satisfaction that this pressure has been generally lower than in previous
droughts. Government remains fully vigilant on this crucial front and are determined
to ensure effective containment of inflation.
 6. The second encouraging feature of economic performance in recent years,
is the sustained growth of industrial sector and improved performance in the field of
infrastructure. For 4 years in succession, manufacturing output has grown by over 8
per cent per year which is a clear vindication of the industrial policy of the Government.
There is a spirit of optimism in industry which is reflected in the generally good
corporate performance and buoyant conditions in the capital market. Electricity
generation has increased steadily and the plant load factor of thermal plants has gone
up from 50.1 per cent in 1994-85 to 56.5 per cent in 1987-88. Targets for capacity
creation in the power sector set for the Seventh Plan are expected to be achieved. In
the Railways the quantity of freight carried has increased in the first three years of the
Seventh Plan by an amount as large as the total increase over the previous 10 years.
More important, there has been a steady improvement in productivity over these years.
A particularly welcome feature is the improvement in the performance of the basic
materials industries. In the first nine months of this year, production of saleable steel
by the integrated steel plants rose by 10.1 per cent, of cement by 12 per cent, nitrogenous
fertilisers by 26.2 per cent and phosphatic fertilisers by 64.5 per cent when compared
with the corresponding period last year.
 7. The performance of Central Public Sector Enterprises has shown
improvement. In the first six months of this year the provisional results of 179 operating
enterprises show that their net profit rose to Rs.694.19 crores from Rs.59.79 crores in
the corresponding period of 1987-88.
 8. We are committed to a policy of supporting the growth of our public
sector. However, we recognise that some changes are required to ensure a higher
level of performance, particularly with regard to resource generation. With a view to
granting greater autonomy to public sector enterprises consistent with their
accountability, the Government has been signing Memoranda of Understanding with
some of the Public Sector Undertakings. The MOU indicates the responsibilities of
the enterprise in fulfilling certain physical, financial and social objectives including
 2

resource generation, and of the Government, in turn, for supporting the enterprise in
fulfilling various objectives and targets set for the enterprise. Eleven Public Sector
Undertakings signed MOUs with the Government for the year 1988-89. Seven more
Public Sector Undertakings will sign MOUs for the year 1989-90. The Government
has constituted a High Level Committee under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary
to evaluate the performance of MOU signing companies and their administrative
Ministries in fulfilling their obligations under die MOU.
 9. I have referred to the resilience of the economy and the improved growth
performance in industry and infrastructure because these are the strengths that will
allow us to pursue even more vigorously our basic objectives of raising the living
standards of the poor and strengthening the economic independence of our country.
But I would be failing in my duty if I do not also draw the attention of the House to
certain problem areas.
 10. One area that needs more attention is the stimulation of savings and the
containment of the budget deficit. We have always prided ourselves on being a nation
with a high savings rate, and our culture has always emphasised the virtues of simple
living and frugality. Budgetary policy must reinforce these virtues of thrift both through
positive incentives to stimulate savings and through measures to restrain luxury
consumption. I will indicate later in the speech the specific measures that we propose
to take towards this end.
 11. Equally important, and in some sense more significant, is the prudent
management of public expenditure: Sometimes, it is assumed that Government
expenditure, as commonly understood, is all on the wages and salaries of Government
servants and on goods and services purchased by the Government Departments to
fulfil their functions. This is far from being the case. In actual fact the direct
consumption expenditure of the Central Government on defence and Government
Administration is less than one quarter of the total expenditure. A little under one
tenth of the Budget is for the direct capital expenditure of the Central Government.
As much as two-thirds of the Budget expenditure really take the form of financial
transfers to other spending entities by Way of interest, subsidies, grants, loans, etc. In
fact, a significant part of what is shown as expenditure in the Budget is only the
financial inter-mediation of funds shown as a capital receipt on the one side and as
expenditure in the form of loans or equity investment on the other.
 12. I am drawing attention to the structure of the expenditure side of the
Central Budget in order to emphasise that the exercise of due prudence is not merely
a matter of economy instructions regarding staff or travel or purchases. That is certainly
important. But it is as important, in fact even more important, to consider other items
of expenditure like subsidies, grants and loans, many of which are embedded in specific
schemes and programmes. We must ask ourselves whether we are getting value for
money from these subsidies, schemes and programmes. In many cases the desired
 3

result could be achieved at a lesser cost by better targetting, consolidation of multiple
programmes, greater decentralisation linked to mobilisation of local resources. We
will ensure that such an evaluation forms the basis for the schemes/programmes that
will form part of the Eighth Plan.
 13. The balance of payments is another area of concern. A certain amount of
pressure on external payments is unavoidable in a situation where we have urgent
needs for investment and modernisation which inevitably require expansion of imports.
It is for this reason that Government have attached high priority to expanding exports
to pay for the imports the economy needs. Our policies in this regard have been
successful and in the past two years our exports have increased quite rapidly-over 25
per cent in 1987-88 and 24 to 25 per cent in the first nine months of the current
financial year. But at the same time, the import bill has also increased sharply, especially
so in the first half of this year. This surge in the import bill is partly due to the
foodgrains and edible oil imports necessitated by last year’s drought and partly to the.
sharp increase in the international prices of metals, chemicals and edible oils. Apart
from this, our debt repayment liabilities were relatively high. The limited availability
of concessional finance has compelled us to increase the share of commercial
borrowings, but we have tried to keep these within limits that are manageable. We do
not envisage any difficulty in servicing our external debt.
 14. The Indian economy has a great deal of underlying strength. The sustained
growth of industrial sector and the investments made in modernisation and upgradation
will show results in terms of higher exports. Ibis in fact is the real answer to the
balance of payments problem. I have every hope that the momentum of export growth
will be sustained and enhanced. If necessary, we must be prepared to restrain domestic
consumption to some extent in certain areas in order to release supplies for export.
 15. We have resisted the temptation to cope with the short-term difficulties in
our balance of payments by ad hoc import regulation through detailed import licensing.
Such a process would be self-defeating as it will disrupt the economy, inhibit exports
and weaken our attempts at modernisation. The composition of our imports has changed
greatly during the eighties. In 1980-81, 65 per cent of our imports consisted of a few
bulk commodities like foodgrains, edible oils, fertilizers, petroleum and metals where
direct import regulation through foreign exchange allocations is relatively easy. In
1987-88, these bulk commodities accounted for only 33 per cent of our imports. The
other imports cover a vast range of raw materials, capital goods, chemicals and industrial
components. Direct regulation of these through foreign exchange allocations is difficult
and could well lead to delays and inefficiency. Hence, the non-bulk import bill has to
be managed through more effective use of indirect instruments.
 16. Later in this speech I will put before you some measures to discourage
low priority imports which go towards the consumption of upper income groups. Kit
culture based consumerism is not the objective of our industrial and trade policy and
must be discouraged.
 4

 17. Industrial policy has an important role to play in stimulating production
which can substitute efficiently for imports. Towards this end the Government will
ensure that domestic production of items which are imported in substantial quantity is
maximised and will re-examine and remove any restrictions which stand in the way.
 18. Let me now turn to the special thrust areas in this Budget.
Anti-Poverty Programmes:
 19. Successive budgets have sought to tackle the basic problems of poverty
and unemployment directly, a process which has been greatly accelerated since 1980-
81. In that year, actual expenditure on rural development, social services and food
and cloth subsidies amounted to Rs.1,971 crores in the Central Budget. The greater
part of the expenditure in these areas is for directly targeted programmes to improve
employment and the earning capacity of the poor and of vulnerable groups like
scheduled castes and tribes, and weaker sections, provide them with basic services
like education, health-care and water supply, and subsidise some items of essential
consumption. In 1988-89 the Budget Estimates provided Rs.8,652 crores for the same
activities.
 20. I have not included in this total the expenditure on agriculture and the
fertilizer subsidy which has increased from an actual expenditure of Rs.1,179 crores
in 1980-81 to a Budget provision of Rs.4,343 crores in 1988-89.
 21. Under the Integrated Rural Development Programme (IRDP) over 25
million families below the poverty line have been assisted to take up income generating
activities. The total investment under this Programme since the beginning of the
Sixth Plan has been over Rs. Ten thousand crores, including the term credit provided
by the financial institutions.
 22. I am happy to inform the Hon’ble Members that under the twin programmes
of employment generation for the rural poor, viz., National Rural Employment
Programme (NREP) and Rural Landless Employment Guarantee Programme (RLEOP),
67 crore mandays of employment were generated during 1987-88 as against the target
of 50 crore mandays.
 23. The present strategy of direct attack on rural poverty through the existing
major programmes of self-employment and wage-employment will be continued and
made more cost effective.
 24. Employment is the most urgent need of our people. Much of the
employment growth will come from growth in agriculture and in labour-intensive
agro-processing industries and services. However, a direct attack on the problem of
unemployment is essential. We, therefore, propose to give a special thrust to all
programmes of employment generation. It is proposed to merge NREP/RLEGP into
a single programme, and to decentralise its implementation. This merged programme
will operate throughout the country and will be funded 75 per cent by the Centre.
 5

 25. Poverty and unemployment are intense in certain disadvantaged regions
and existing employment programmes fall short of needs. Hence, in addition to the
reorganised national programme it is proposed to launch a new intensive rural
employment programme which will provide additional funds to selected 120 districts
which are backward and suffer from acute unemployment.
 26. In this year when we are celebrating the birth centenary of Pandit
Jawaharlal Nehru, the architect of modern India, there is perhaps no better way of
remembering him than to intensify our efforts to remove poverty and unemployment.
This programme is a further major step in that direction. It will be named after
Panditji to reflect the deepest aspiration of our people.
 27. This new programme will allow fuller employment opportunities to at
least one member of each family living below the poverty line. The funds for this
scheme will be in addition to the provision available to the district under the NREP
and RLEGP Programmes. These funds will be merged and locally useful schemes
will be taken up to maximise employment opportunities and the creation of productive
assets. We hope that the enhancement of the provision for employment through this
new scheme will ensure substantial improvement in living standards of the poor and
an increase in the productive and socially useful assets in these areas. The details of
the programme will be announced later. The provision for this new programme will
be Rs.500 crores in 1989-90. Including this, the provision for employment programmes
will be Rs.1.711 crores in 1989-90. I propose to cover the cost of the new programme
basically by mobilising additional resources from those who already have substantial
incomes and the benefit of gainful employment. I will revert to this later in my
speech.
 28. We welcome further efforts in this direction by State Governments.
Recently, the Constitution has been amended to raise the upper limit for the profession
tax to Rs.2,500. We urge State Governments to use this enabling provision to mobilise
additional resources for expanding employment.
 29. Additional employment will help poor households to raise their standard
of living. But in addition a more direct effort at improving the condition of women
and children is necessary. I therefore propose a new programme for the free distribution
of saris to destitute women. As for children the ongoing Integrated Child Development
Services Programme will be greatly expanded to cover 500 more blocks in addition to
over 1700 already covered. This programme is aimed at raising the health, nutrition
and educational status of poor children.
 30. The total outlay for rural development, social services and on food and
cloth subsidies will be Rs.9374 crores in this Budget.
 31. The implementation of anti-poverty and social services programmes takes
place largely through State Plans. Many of these programmes are externally assisted.
 6

At present 70 per cent of assistance received under externally aided projects is made
available to State Governments as additional Central assistance. It is proposed to
modify these arrangements to enhance the additional central assistance made available
to the States to 100 per cent for assistance received under externally aided projects in
the social services sector, and for programmes which have a direct bearing on poverty
alleviation. This decision will make available substantially more resources to the
States than under the present arrangements, and will facilitate additional investments
by them in these vital sectors. Sectors which are expected to benefit from this decision
are Agriculture, Rural Development, Irrigation, Environment, Health, Family welfare,
Nutrition, Women’s Development, Education, Housing, Water Supply and Urban
Development.
Agriculture
 32. Agriculture is the mainstay of our population and a priority sector in our
Plans. Today the incidence of taxes on agricultural outputs and inputs is minimal and
in fact substantial subsidies are provided both in the Central and State Budgets.
 33. As I mentioned earlier, Plan and non-Plan expenditure on agriculture and
the fertilizer subsidy has gone up sharply since 1980-81. This year also provision is
being stepped up and will reach a level of Rs.5173 crores.
 34. Credit is a major input for agricultural production. In order to increase
the flow of credit to agriculture, the target for direct finance to agriculture by Public
Sector banks, which was raised last year from 16 per cent to 17 per cent of their total
outstanding advances is being further raised to 18 per cent to be achieved by the end
of 1989-90. With this change the total credit to be made available to agriculture by
commercial banks, Regional Rural Banks and Co-operative banks will increase by
over Rs.4,000 crores in 1989-90. Hon’ble Member; are aware that the rate of interest
on crop loans upto Rs.15,000 was reduced last year and the reduction varied between
1 1/2 per cent and 2 1/2 per cent. With a view to extending the scope of relief, the
Reserve Bank of India is today issuing instructions reducing the rate of interest charged
on crop loans between Rs.15,000 and Rs.25,000 to 12 per cent from the existing
maximum rate of 14 per cent.
 35. One area of concern is the pace of implementation of irrigation projects
in the States. In addition, the gap between the potential created and utilisation of
irrigation, leaves much to be desired. The decision to provide higher additionality for
external assistance for agriculture and irrigation which I have referred to earlier will
add to the funds available for these purposes in State Plans. My hope is that this will
help in ensuring better utilisation of aid funds and quicker completion of projects.
 36. The rapid growth in incomes in our rural economy will require not merely
higher production but also diversification of crops, better post-harvest technology,
processing of agricultural products into higher value products, etc.
 7

 37. The new Ministry of Food Processing Industries, the first of its kind in
the developing countries, was established in July, 1988 to provide for a dynamic
relationship between the farmer and industry so that there is better utilisation of
agricultural products, greater addition of value to rural produce, generation of massive
employment in rural areas, enhancement of the net level of rural incomes and induction
/Of modem technology in the processing of food. Another objective of the Ministry
is to promote utilisation of the large scale wastages which take place in the pre and
post harvest handling of fruits and vegetables, thereby improving the economic
utilisation of food produced as well as enhancing the nutritional inputs available to
the people. Later in my speech I will indicate some fiscal incentives to provide a
greater stimulus to these industries.
Housing
 38. The Government attaches very high priority to housing. It is an activity
that meets a very essential need and that is capable of generating a very substantial
volume of employment. In pursuance of this, the Government has formulated a
comprehensive National Housing Policy. In the field of housing finance several new
initiatives were taken in 1988-89. The Reserve Bank of India has liberalised the terms
and conditions of housing loans. The Life Insurance Corporation has launched a new
scheme known as Bima Niwas Yojana which will enable policy holders to receive
financial assistance for purchase or construction of flats.
 39. The National Housing Bank has been established and has now become
operational. Promotion of a healthy housing finance system and providing adequate
finance to the housing sector are the principal functions of the Bank. In formulating
its financing policies, the Bank will adopt the motto of the small man first. It has
accordingly announced its re-finance scheme in respect of loans given for low income
housing of upto 40 square metres. Similarly, in land development and housing projects
financed by it, the Bank will ensure that not less than 75 per cent of the plots to be
thus developed or houses to be built, will be for those seeking built-up accommodation
upto 40 square metres.
 40. The prospect of owning a house is a major incentive for saving. We have,
therefore, decided to establish a new scheme called the Home Loan Account Scheme
which will be launched by the National Housing Bank in co-operation with scheduled
banks. To facilitate participation by all segments of the community especially in rural
areas, the minimum contribution to the saving scheme is fixed at Rs.30 per month or
Rs.360 per annum. The savings will earn interest at 10 per cent per annum. Any
individual. not owning a house anywhere will be eligible to join the scheme. After
saving for a minimum period of five years, a member will be eligible for a loan equal
in amount to a multiple of the accumulated savings including interest Specific efforts
will be made to link up the Home Loan Account Scheme with the registration for land
or house allotment by public agencies. I will propose certain tax concessions for
these savings.
 8

Industrial Development
 41. Let me now turn to the industrial sector. I have referred to the good
performance of the industry and infrastructure sector. We believe that the changes
with regard to industrial licensing, price and distribution controls and trade policy that
we have made over the past few years have paid rich dividends. The underlying
theme of these policy changes is to promote both growth and efficiency by stimulating
domestic competition, technology acquisition and modernisation. Our industrial
structure is now very complex. Many segments have reached a certain degree of
maturity. In this situation it is possible for us to relax many of our detailed regulations
and yet remain in control over the direction of development through a judicious use of
fiscal and credit policies. In furtherance of this approach, the Government has decided
to decontrol the pricing and distribution of cement and aluminium with immediate
effect.
 42. Since the partial decontrol of cement from 28th February, 1982, the cement
industry has witnessed an impressive growth. The production of cement which was
21.01 million tonnes in 1981-82 is slated to increase to 43.5 million tonnes in 1988-
89 and 49 million tonnes in 1989-90. Over this period, the levy obligation has been
progressively decreased and a fair price for the levy cement has been given. These
policies have led to the stoppage of imports since 1985. In fact the country is now in
a position to export cement. Our long term strategy is to increase the production to 65
million tonnes by the end of the Eighth Plan and 87 million tonnes by the end of the
Ninth Plan. At present, the levy obligation works out to less than 20 per cent of the
total output of the industry. It has now been decided that all price and distribution
controls on the cement industry be removed with effect from 1st March, 1989. To
ensure the availability of cement at reasonable prices in the remote and hilly regions
of the country, a suitable subsidy scheme is being worked out.
 43. With the progressive commissioning of the National Aluminium Company
(NALCO), India has made great strides in the production of aluminium metal. After
achieving a record production of 278,000 tonnes in 1987-88, production in 1988-89 is
estimated to go up by 30 per cent to about 360,000 tonnes. During 1989-90 aluminium
production is likely to increase by another 20 per cent to reach a level of 435,000
tonnes. NALCO is also exporting alumina and some aluminium and will earn about
Rs.200 crores in foreign exchange during 1988-89. India has thus emerged not only
self-sufficient in aluminium metal but will generate exportable surplus in the years
ahead. In view of this the Government has decided to decontrol the price and
distribution of aluminium with effect from 1st March, 1989.
 44. The dispersal of industry to backward areas remains a major plank of our
industrial policy. The principal barrier to industrial development in backward areas is
the lack of infrastructure. Recently, the Government has announced a new approach
to this in the form of the Growth Centre Scheme. In the first phase 61 growth centres
will be taken up and provided with infrastructure facilities of a high order. I have
 9

provided Rs.20 crores as the Central contribution for this scheme in 1989-90 Plan
and, depending on the pace of implementation, this will be enhanced, if necessary.
 45. Let me now turn to the operation of capital markets. A substantial volume
of personal savings now flows through the financial instruments traded in this market
in fact, the breadth and depth of our financial structure is an asset that we must use to
mobilise savings and channel it into productive directions. Our rural households are
showing growing interest in investing in bonds, debentures and shares . However, the
provision regarding tax deduction at source is a disincentive. We have already raised
the limit below which there will be no tax deduction at source to Rs.2,500 for dividends.
I propose to do the same for interest payments on bonds and debentures.
 46. The flow of savings into the Capital Market is directed very much to
fixed interest bonds and debentures. However, industrial development also requires
risk capital in the form of equity. In order to stimulate the flow of personal savings
into equity, the Government intends to introduce an Equity-Linked Savings Scheme.
The Scheme will operate through UTI and recognised Mutual Funds and investments
will be eligible for tax deductions on the basis of net annual additions to such savings.
Details of the Scheme will be announced shortly.
 47. The dynamism shown by the industrial sector is to a certain extent the
result of our effort to stimulate competition. However, as the industrial environment
becomes more competitive, we will need effective measures for coping with the
problems of industrial sickness. Some arrangements are in place under the Sick
Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985. However, it is necessary that
we take steps before this stage of sickness is reached to encourage and stimulate
potentially sick units to rehabilitate themselves. In order to do this, the Government
intends to work out an excise relief scheme for weak units to provide them with a
proportion of their excise payments as part of a diversification, modernisation or
rehabilitation package approved by designated Financial Institutions.
Other Areas
 48. Let me now turn to couple of other areas where I propose some changes.
 49. The Government has been examining the utility of the Gold Control Act
to see whether it has served its purpose or not and whether it requires any modification.
In the fight of this examination the Government proposes to modify the Gold Control
Act with a view to keeping a measure of control over primary gold only. This is
expected to benefit hundreds of thousands of goldsmiths and artisans who will be able
to freely conduct their age-old traditional profession and provide better service to the
customers in terms of quality, purity and price. Further this will lead to a boost in the
export of gold jewellery which has been stagnant. The details will be worked out and
necessary legislation will be introduced soon.
 50. I have referred to the need to give a stimulus to savings and have already
referred to two measures directed towards this end -the Home Loan Account Scheme
 10

and the Equity Linked Savings Scheme. Several initiatives in the area of small savings
have been taken in the recent years. I am happy to report to the House that the Indira
Vikas Patra, introduced in 1986 and the Kisan Vikas Patra introduced in 1988 are
attracting a substantial volume of savings. These two savings instruments do not
carry any tax concessions. I propose to introduce a new National Savings Certificate
Series VIII which will carry an interest rate of 12 per cent and will be eligible for tax
concession under Section 80C but not under Section 80L. The existing National
Savings Certificates Series VI and VII will be discontinued. This is part of the process
of rationalisation of savings incentives.
 51. I am conscious of the need to protect the savings of workers in the provident
fund and their right to gratuity. The Employees Provident Fund Act has been modified
to raise the minimum contribution to 8 113 per cent and this enhanced contribution
has taken effect from 1st August, 1988. The Payment of Gratuity Act has been amended
to provide for compulsory insurance of gratuity liabilities or the setting up of a gratuity
fund under income-tax rules where the pattern of investment will be as prescribed by
the Government from time to time. It is proposed to implement these provisions soon
after framing necessary rules.
 52. As the Hon’ble Members are aware, this Government has, in the recent
past, taken various measures to help pensioners. The Government is keen to ensure
that pension and pensionary benefits are sanctioned and paid promptly and procedures
for disbursement simplified. Towards this end, the Government has decided to further
simplify the procedure of pension payment to civil pensioners who draw their pension
from banks. The proposed simplification envisages that the two intermediary agencies
of Accountants General and District Treasuries will not be involved in this work
which will be handled by a new Office of Chief Controller of Accounts (Pensions) in
the Ministry of Finance. The entire work of pension payment and accounting thereof
will be computerised. The new system is proposed to be introduced during 1989-90.
 53. I also propose some fiscal relief on family pensions and a new savings
scheme for retiring Government employees with certain tax concessions which I will
revert to later.
 54. Our freedom fighters have made great sacrifices in our struggle for
independence. In this year when we are celebrating the birth centenary of one of the
greatest leaders of this struggle, it is but appropriate that we raise the pension for
freedom fighters to Rs.750 as a mark of the nation’s gratitude.
 55. I shall now turn to the Revised Estimates for 1988-89 and the Budget
Estimates for 1989-90.
Revised Estimates 1988-89
 56. Since the presentation of the Budget for the current year, additional
provisions have become necessary for certain inevitable increases in expenditure.
 11

Budget support for Central Plan has to be increased by Rs.771 crores. The increases
mainly relate to settlement of claims arising out of crop insurance scheme, subsidy for
setting up of industries in backward areas, strengthening of equity base of Power
Finance Corporation, payment to Shipping Companies to meet commitments made by
the erstwhile Shipping Development Fund Committee and passing on to financial
institutions rupee equivalent of external credits extended to them.
 57. Central assistance for State and U.T. Plans is expected to be Rs.421
crores higher mainly due to special assistance that has to be provided to Punjab for
financing its Plan outlay.
 58. On the non-Plan side an additional provision of Rs.300 crores is required
for export promotion and market development. Subsidy on indigenous fertilizer will
also be higher by Rs.250 crores. A marginal increase of Rs.200 has been made in
defence expenditure. An additional provision of Rs.497 crores will be required for
defence pensions on the basis of actual claims arising out of revision of defence
pension rates. Grant assistance to States affected y floods has to be increased by
Rs.100 crores. Provision of certain facilities in Punjab necessitated by security
considerations has cost Rs.71 crores.
 59. There have been other increases as well. All these would have resulted in
a much higher order of increase in non-Plan expenditure and in deficit financing.
Government have taken a number of measures to contain the increase in expenditure
and improve receipts.
 60. Ministries and Departments were instructed to locate savings to meet to
the maximum extent possible the increases in expenditure including the liability for
additional instalments of dearness allowance and bonus sanctioned to Government
employees during the year. The economy instructions issued last year were continued
this year also. As a result of these measures, the increase in non-Plan expenditure has
been contained.
 61. Gross tax revenue is expected to yield Rs.776 crores more. The
improvement is mainly in Union Excise duties, Customs duties and Corporation Tax.
Under non-Tax Revenue the profit on imported edible oils is expected to show a sharp
reduction owing to an increase in international prices. Capital receipts are expected
to show significant improvement. Total receipts of Government are now estimated at
Rs.67843 crores as against Rs.66076 crores in the Budget estimates. Total expenditure
is estimated at Rs.75783 crores as against the Budget estimate of Rs.73560 crores.
The overall deficit for the year is now estimated at Rs.7940 crores. Thus, in spite of
the large additional burden thrown on the budget and the various concessions given it
has been ensured that overall deficit does not increase substantially.
Budget Estimates 1989-90
 62. Next year being the last year of the Seventh Five, Year Plan period every
effort has been made to ensure that maximum resources are made available for
 12

development. Budgetary support for Central Plan including special additional provision
of Rs.500 crores for new economic programmes is placed at Rs.16,964 crores. Internal
and extra budgetary resources for Central Plan are estimated at Rs.17,482 crores. The
total Central Plan outlay for 1989-90 will thus be Rs.34,446 crores against the current
year’s approved outlay of Rs.28,715 crores showing a step up of nearly 20 per cent.
 63. Hon’ble Members will be happy to note that in real terms the actual outlay
in the Central Sector for the five years would be around 115 per cent of the original
Seventh Plan outlay.
 64. The Central Plan for 1989-90 places a great deal of emphasis on agriculture,
rural development and related areas. A new strategy for agricultural planning has
been developed on the basis of different agro-climatic regions. The provision for
agriculture and irrigation in the Central Plan has been stepped up to Rs.1408 crores.
I also propose allocation of Rs.495 crores for the Department of Fertilizers.
 65. The programmes of Rural Development are central to our Plan strategy.
Inclusive of the provision for the new programme, the provision in the Central Plan
for this sector has been stepped up by 28.4 per cent. For promoting rural
industrialisation, the reorganised Khadi and Village Industries Commission has planned
to expand and diversify its activities. Besides identifying 33 new industries for
promotion in the current year, 41 other industries will be taken up for development in
the future in a phased manner.
 66. The provision for social services in the Central Plan is being stepped up
to Rs.3396 crores. The main emphasis in the social welfare programme in the Annual
Plan 1989-90 will be on development of services for early childhood care, women’s
development, prevention of disabilities and rehabilitation of the affected persons. In
order to meet these goals, a large expansion is envisaged in programmes like Integrated
Child Development Service (ICDS), income-generating schemes for poor and destitute
women, education, training and economic rehabilitation of disabled persons. Adequate
attention will be given to creating awareness regarding the rights of women, campaign
against the atrocities inflicted on them and also against the social evils like child
marriage, dowry, drug abuse, etc.
 67. The Seventh Plan has been characterised by a special thrust towards human
resources development. The approach, strategies and major thrust areas included in
the Seventh Five Year Plan and the priority programmes of the National Policy on
Education 1986, taken up in 1987-88 are being continued. Emphasis is given on
universalisation of elementary education, eradication of adult illiteracy,
vocationalisation. of secondary education, improvement and consolidation of quality
and standards of higher education and modernisation and removal of obsolescence in
technical education.
 68. In order to maintain the tempo of growth that has been attained in recent
years, it is necessary that we continue to invest in the expansion and modernisation of
 13

our infrastructure sectors. Hence, the outlays in the Central Plan for Power development
have been raised by 38.6 per cent, for Railways by 15.6 per cent and for
Telecommunications by 56.6 per cent.
 69. Major public sector projects in the industrial sector included in the Seventh
Plan have either been completed or are expected to be completed in the last year of the
Plan. These include the expansion of Bhilai Steel Plant, Stage I of Visakhapatnarn
Steel Plant, the Aluminium Complex of NALCO in Orissa, the gas based fertilizer
plants at Bijaippur, Aonla, Namrup III, the Caprolactam project at Udyogmandal,
captive power plants at Durgapur, Barauni, Panipat and Bhatinda and the Maharashtra
Gas Cracker Complex.
 70. In the industry sector adequate outlays have been provided in the Annual
Plan 1989-90 for productive schemes and projects of on-going nature which would be
commissioned during the last year of the Seventh Plan, as wen as for initiating the
necessary preliminary action for the Eighth Plan.
 71. Central assistance for the Plans of State and Union territory Governments
is placed at Rs.10,850 crores against the current year’s Budget level of Rs.9,714
crores. Total expenditure from Central Budget on Plan account will be Rs.27,814
crores next year as against current year’s Budget level of Rs.25,714 crores.
 72. Government is aware of the extremely difficult circumstances in which
our brave armed forces have been carrying out their arduous responsibilities of
defending our country. The whole nation owes its grateful thanks to them for ensuring
the security of our borders and for bringing credit to our country when called upon to
help other friendly countries in their hour of need. At the same time, all of us recognise
that there is continuing need for implementing measures for greater cost effectiveness
in our expenditure on defence. My colleagues in the Ministry of Defence have already
introduced a number of measures to improve the cost effectiveness of such expenditure.
Keeping this in view I have provided for a sum of Rs.13000 crores for Defence during
the coming year. I assure the House that Government will not falter in ensuring the
highest level of defence preparedness.
 73. Provision for food, fertilizer and export promotion subsidies next year is
Rs.7,412 crores against Rs.6,841 crores in the current year’s Revised Estimates. Interest
charges next year are estimated at Rs.17,000 crores against Rs.14,150 crores in the
current year. Grants to States as a result of the recommendations of the Ninth Finance
Commission are estimated to be Rs.612 crores higher than in the current year. An
additional provision of Rs.152 crores has been made next year for expenses in
connection with the General Elections. The deficit of Department of Posts is estimated
to be. Rs.97 crores higher than in the current year.
 74. Every effort has been made to contain the growth. of non-Plan expenditure
and only the barest minimum provisions have been allowed. Total non-Plan expenditure
 14

in 1989-90 is estimated at Rs.54,347 crores against Rs.48,877 crores in the Revised
Estimates for the current year.
 75. Coming to Receipts, Gross Tax Revenue at the existing rate of taxation is
estimated at Rs.49,588 crores. After payment of Rs.12,054 crores to States as their
share of taxes and Rs.50 crores to local bodies in Union territories as assignment of
revenue, the net accrual to Centre is estimated at Rs.37,484 crores against Rs.32,652
crores in the current year. Market borrowings are placed at Rs.7,400 crores against
Rs.7,250 crores in the current year. External assistance net of repayment is placed at
Rs.3,722 crores against Rs.3,216 crores in die current year. Taking into account the
variations in other receipts and expenditure, the overall deficit for next year at existing
rates of taxation is estimated at Rs.8240 crores.


