SPEECH OF SHRI Y.B.CHAVAN MINISTER OF FINANCE INTRODUCING
 THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1974-75


 Sir.
 I rise to present the revised estimates for 1973-74 and the budget estimates for
1974-75.
 2. This As the fourth regular budget of the Union Government which I have
been privileged to present to this House. The principal concern of every Central budget
has to be to strike a proper balance between the requirements of accelerated growth,
stability, greater social justice and self-reliance. In the long run, these objectives are
self-reinforcing. In the short run, however, a reconciliation of these objectives is not
an easy task even under favourable conditions. During the last three years conditions
have not been favourable; in fact they have been far from normal in many ways. In
each of these years, we had to face new challenges of extraordinary dimensions. We
have tried to meet those challenges to the best of our ability. I shall, however, readily
admit that, because of unusually severe strains caused by a combination of certain
national and international factors beyond our control, progress in achieving our
objectives has fallen short of expectations.
 3. I would like to state frankly that in the coming financial year the economy
will be faced with even greater challenges. lts strength and adaptability will be severely
tested. The steep rise in the price of crude oil and also some other commodities has
turned the terms of trade sharply against us and has rendered our tasks exceptionally
difficult. Recent developments must, however, be viewed in a wider historical
perspective. Nowhere in the world has the process of social and economic change
been smooth or free from ups and downs. I find no reason, therefore, to lose heart or
to start questioning our basic goals and objectives. Our socio-economic objectives
remain as relevant as before. Our commitment to our goals is as resolute as ever. We
cannot give up the war against poverty, ignorance and disease because the going is
more difficult than anticipated, though our tactics may need to be readjusted to changing
circumstances.
THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY
 4. As the House is aware, the Government has been deeply concerned about
the acute inflationary pressures that have prevailed in the economy during the last two
years. The measures that have been adopted to deal with these inflationary pressures
are well known to the Honourable Members. It is a matter of deep regret to me that
despite these measures prices have continued to rise. The House will appreciate that
 1

the pressure on prices was inevitable as a result of the unsatisfactory performance in
the field of agricultural production in two successive years, 1971-72 and 1972-73. The
steep fall of 9.5 per cent in agricultural output in 1972-73 was bound to upset the
delicate balance between demand and supply. Because of a much sharper increase in
international prices, the substantial imports of food grains that we arranged were also
unable to exercise a stabilising influence on domestic prices. Even with a more normal
kharif crop in 1973, the pressure on prices has not abated in view of other inflationary
forces at work in the economy.
 5. It appears certain that the national income in 1973-74 will record a
significant growth; this will help to neutralise the unsatisfactory behaviour of national
income in the two previous years. It is, however, a matter of deep concern to us that
in the Fourth Plan our overall rate of growth has been much lower than the Plan target.
It is also a matter of deep regret that the upsurge in industrial production that was
evident in 1972 was not sustained in 1973. The available indicators suggest that there
was hardly any increase in the rate of growth of industrial production in 1973. It will
be a major objective of our economic policy to revive the tempo of industrial activity
in 1974. To secure an adequate rate of growth is the challenge that we face in the Fifth
Five Year Plan.
 6. As the House is aware, in order to supplement domestic supplies,
Government imported significant quantities of food grains and vegetable oil from
abroad during 1973-74. These imports were necessary for the well-being of the nation,
but have naturally greatly inflated our import bin. Fortunately, our exports have grown
at a satisfactory rate and, as a result, the deterioration in our balance of payments has
been contained within manageable proportions, However, it is no use minimising the
likely adverse effect on our balance of payments which will inevitably arise as a result
of the steep increase in the prices of crude oil and of commodities like fertilizer and
non-ferrous metals. In the long run, among the most important steps by which our
economy can adjust to this massive structural shift in our terms of trade, without
affecting our growth prospects, is by replacing oil, wherever possible by other
domestically available sources of energy, and by intensifying the programme for oil
exploration. In this context, the highest priority attaches to securing a significant
increase in the production of coal in the shortest possible time. Even so, a large
increase in our import bill is inevitable, and this will necessitate a significant increase
in our export earnings. The oil crisis, while no doubt adding to our difficulties, has
already created new export opportunities in respect of products such as jute textiles,
cotton textiles and leather goods. We must grasp this opportunity and do everything in
our power to maximise our export earnings. A comprehensive review of our export
prospects has been undertaken. This review will enable us to launch a well articulated
programme for exploiting fully our export potential.
 7. In my budget speech last year, I had listed control of inflation, promotion
of higher levels of savings and investment, greater viability of our external payments,
 2

and generation of new employment opportunities as the most pressing immediate
tasks before the nation. The steep increase in prices in the last one year, the severe
pressure on the balance of payments that will inevitably arise in the wake of higher
prices of oil and other international commodities, and the stagnation of industrial
production in 1973 have lent an added urgency to these tasks. The relatively poor
performance of the economy last year should not give rise to a growing feeling of
doubt, uncertainty and cynicism. We must combat these attitudes and preserve the
people’s faith in our democratic polity as an effective vehicle of social change.
REVISED ESTIMATES 1973-74
 8. The House will recall that the budget estimates for 1973-74 had envisaged
a deficit of Rs.87 crores. This excluded provision for expenditure arising out of the
recommendations of the Third Pay Commission, since the Commission’s report was
not available at the time of formulation of the budget proposals. It was anticipated that
the acceptance of these recommendations would raise the budget deficit to a level
substantially higher than Rs.87 crores. However, subsequent events, largely an
outgrowth of the steep fall in agricultural output in 1972-73, have led to a much
greater deterioration in the budgetary position than was originally anticipated.
 9. As Honourable Members are aware, extensive drought relief operations,
started on account of the widespread and unprecedented drought in 1972-73, had to be
continued to a large extent in 1973-74 also. At the peak of these operations 1,43,740
relief works were opened over the entire country, and 93 lakhs of people were employed.
It was hoped that with the onset of the monsoon in 1973-74, and increasing involvement
of the labour force in agricultural operations, the number of people employed on relief
works would diminish appreciably. Unfortunately this did not happen. Consequently
the Central Government had to continue massive assistance to State Governments on
this account. Honourable Members will recall that a sum of Rs.100 crores was provided
in the current year’s budget for this purpose. This provision proved to be wholly
inadequate and had to be stepped up by another Rs.220 crores.
 10. In this connection I would invite the attention of Honourable Members to
the observations of the Finance Commission regarding expenditure on relief for natural
calamities. The Commission has urged that instead of incurring expenditure on relief
on an ad hoe basis, provision should be made on a much larger scale for development
of drought and flood-prone areas in the Fifth Plan, both in the State and Central
sectors. Following these recommendations it has been decided to integrate these
programmes with development plans to the extent possible.
 11. Apart from larger assistance provided to State Governments for expenditure
on natural cab- amities relief, provision for special assistance to States to meet gaps in
their resources and for specified projects, had also to be increased. The budget provided
an amount of Rs.198 crores for this purpose, and this will have to be stepped up by
nearly Rs.91 crores.

 3

 12. The Central exchequer had to bear other burdens as well. The expenditure
on food subsidy will be higher than the provision of Rs.130 crores by Rs.121 crores
despite some revision in the issue prices of food grains. This is essentially due to the
high cost of imported food grains.
 13. The direct impact of the price rise on Government spending arises from
the increased quantum of dearness allowance provided to Government employees this
year. Honourable Members will recall that in accepting the recommendations of the
Third Pay Commission we had agreed to a liberalised formula for dearness allowance
to enable low paid Government employees to get adequate compensation for the rise
in the cost of living. On this basis, the four installments of dearness allowance we
have sanctioned will cost the exchequer nearly Rs.100 crores.
 14. The impact of the recommendations of the Third Pay Commission was
estimated at Rs.150 crores. This was a large commitment, particularly in the context
of the difficult economic situation prevailing in the country, and was based on the
expectation that we would accept most of the Commission’s recommendations. We
have in fact agreed to make some significant improvement’s in the Pay Commission’s
recommendations regarding the pay structure of Government employees; these
improvements alone are likely to cost the exchequer Rs.61 crores a year on a recurring,
and Rs.25 crores on non-recurring basis. The Government has stretched its resources
to the utmost in order to meet the demands of its employees. I sincerely hope that they
will appreciate this, and do their best to improve their efficiency and productivity.
 15. On the receipts side, there have been shortfalls. The stagnation in
production in a number of major sectors of industry, caused by shortage of raw materials
and power cuts, has adversely affected receipts from excise duties. Shortfall on this
account is estimated to be Rs.107 crores.
 16. As the Railway Minister stated yesterday, the finances of the Railways in
1973-74 have been under considerable strain for reasons dealt with at length in his
speech. The net additional impact of the financial working of the Railways on the
general budget in the current year is expected to be around Rs.109 crores
 17. In order to meet the additional and inescapable demands on the Central
Budget, and to contain the deficit to the minimum, Government had made serious
efforts both to tap additional resources and to restrict expenditures. The net market
borrowing by the Centre this, year will amount to Rs.472 crores, as against the Budget
provision of Rs.326 crores. The expenditure requirements of the various Ministries
were carefully reviewed and savings were located in their administrative and other
non-developmental expenditure. In view of the difficult resource position, a review of
the Plan outlays was also undertaken, particularly in regard to schemes which were
not vital to the core of the Plan.

 4

 18. Despite all these efforts, the year-end deficit will be of the order of Rs.650
crores. We are deeply concerned about the deleterious effects of deficit financing. But
no Government can overlook its obligation to alleviate the hardships and sufferings of
large sections of the people. It is this obligation that has rendered a larger deficit
inescapable.
BUDGET ESTIMATES 1974-75
 19. The next financial year is the first year of the Fifth Plan. A significant
step-up in the rate of investment is clearly an essential condition for the realisation of
basic objectives of the Plan. At the same time, the general economic situation renders
the task of raising the needed financial resources more difficult. The sharp rise in
prices in the last two years has greatly increased non-developmental expenditure,
particularly on pay and allowances, thereby reducing the surpluses for development.
In addition, the continued sluggishness of industrial production has affected the growth
of revenues. In framing the budget for 1974-75, we also have to take into account the
likely impact of the oil crisis and very high prices of many imported commodities on
the country’s balance of payments, the pattern of imports, and the growth of agricultural
and industrial output on government revenues. I would be the last to deny that there
are many sources of uncertainty and anxiety in the present situation. Nevertheless, I
am convinced that a legitimate concern with our immediate problems must not lead to
a neglect of our long-term growth objectives. That would be a self-defeating exercise.
In my view, recent events have only further vindicated the soundness of a development
strategy which must succeed in strengthening the country’s industrial and energy base.
 20. The Budget for 1974-75 provides for a total outlay of Rs.2966 crores for
the Plan. Out of this Rs.911 crores have been provided as assistance to State and
Union Territories Plan, while the provision for the Central Plan is Rs.2055 crores.
This provision represents a difficult compromise between two conflicting
considerations, namely to keep deficit financing to the minimum and to keep the
wheels of production moving. Particular care has been taken to make adequate provision
for such industrial and agricultural schemes and projects as are essential for the future
growth of the economy, and are likely to be completed in the first two years of the
Fifth Plan, so that the economy derives the benefits from investments early enough in
the Plan period.
 21. The role of coal as the most important source of commercial energy has
been underlined by the current shortage of oil and the resultant energy crisis. The
development of coal has, therefore, been accorded very high priority in the budget for
1974-75. Rs.97 crores have been earmarked for this purpose. In other words the outlay
on coal has been increased four times as compared to the provision of Re. 24 crores
last year. Later in my speech, I shall outline certain fiscal measures which are designed
to encourage industry to switch over, as early as possible, from the use of oil to coal
as a source of energy.

 5

 22. No less critical is the role of steel in our economic development. The
availability of steel has a major influence not only on the pace of industrial development,
bit also on the viability of our international payments. For all these reasons, the
budgetary provision for steel production has been fixed at Rs.162 crores. If one adds
to this figure the internal resources available the total figure amounts to Rs.276 crores,
which is Rs.75 crores more than the total of Rs.201 crores available this year.
 23. In order to reduce the country’s acute dependence on imported supplies of
non-ferrous metals it is also necessary to push ahead with the development of domestic
resources as fast as we can. Accordingly, a provision of Rs.75 crores is being made in
the budget for 1974-75 for the development of this vital sector. This is against Rs.56
crores provided this year.
 24. In view of the predominant role the railways play in our transport economy
we have ensured that adequate finances are provided for the development of railways.
As Honourable members are aware, the railways have run into serious financial
difficulties and their own resources may not be sufficient to finance a Plan of an order
which will meet the requirements of our economy. I have, therefore, considerably
stepped -up the budgetary support for the Railways to Rs.342 crores next year, as
against Rs.181 crores in the current year.
 25. Power is a vital input for both industry and agriculture. The power shortages
that developed during recent years have had a crippling effect on the economy and
have highlighted the urgent need for augmenting our generating capacity and improving
the operational performance of existing plants. The Fifth Plan envisages that installed
capacity of power generation will be stepped up to 33 million k.w. by the end of the
Plan. The strategy is to expedite the completion of projects which are already under
construction, and to go in for new thermal schemes which have short gestation periods.
The importance of rural electrification in developing the rural economy can hardly be
over-emphasised. Though many of the rural electrification schemes fall in the State
Plan sector, as a special case, I am providing Rs.40 crores for the Rural Electrification
Corporation over and above Rs.790 crores of assistance provided ‘to States for their
Plan. The total budgetary provision for power in the Central Budget during 1974-75
will be Rs.121 crores.
 26. Considering the current shortage of fertilizers and difficulties in procuring
these from abroad, the thrust of next year’s Plan will be to maximise production from
installed capacity and to speed up the implementation of projects already under way.
The budget provides Rs.163 crores for this sector as against Rs.94 crores in the current
year which is a substantial increase.
 27. While every effort has been ‘made to provide resources to stimulate
industrial production, the requirements of the agricultural sector have not been ignored.
We are providing Rs.246 crores as budgetary support for agricultural programmes.
The behaviour of agriculture has a crucial impact on the growth of national income,
 6

prices, industrial production, balance of payments and the distribution of income.
Accordingly~ shall not allow paucity of resources to stand in the way of maximising
our agricultural output. Honourable Members will be happy to note that various
agricultural schemes which we have undertaken in the last few years such as schemes
for small and marginal farmers, tribal development, development of hill areas, provision
of institutional credits, drought-prone areas programmes, and the applied nutrition
programme are making satisfactory progress.
 28. Within the overall constraints of resources, and after meeting the minimum
needs of the core sectors of development I have attempted to provide as large funds as
possible for social services like education, health, family planning, social welfare and
housing. The provisions made in earlier Plans for meeting minimum essential needs
for social consumption did not achieve the desired results, mainly because related
programmes were not given due priority, and an effective integration of facilities was
not attempted. Honourable Members are aware that the draft Fifth Plan has provided
for a National Programme of Minimum Needs to achieve a certain minimum level of
social consumption in the form of elementary education, rural health, drinking water,
provision for slum clearance, rural roads and rural electrification. I hope that the State
Governments will be able to ensure effective utilisation of the resources allocated for
this programme.
 29. The total provision for the Central Plan in the Budget inclusive of Union
Territory Plan of Rs.81 crores will amount to Rs.2136 crores excluding Central
assistance of Rs.830 crores for the Plans of the States. In addition, extra budgetary
resources for financing the Central Plan will amount to Rs.574 crores. The resources
for State Plans for 1974-75 will be of the order of Rs.2059 crores. Thus, the total
Plan outlay during 1974-75 will amount to Rs.4769 crores as against Rs.4364 crores
in 1973 -74.
 30. We have decided in favour of a larger Plan outlay to enable us to move
faster towards the twin objectives of removal of poverty and attainment of economic
self-reliance. I am however convinced that Plan investments can yield benefits on the
scale anticipated only if the Plan is implemented efficiently and all the participants in
the productive process-management and labour-accept the larger obligations they owe
to the community. Maintenance of satisfactory industrial relations particularly in key
sectors is absolutely essential if the Plan targets are to be achieved. Monetary and
fiscal policies should also be directed towards the achievement of Plan objectives.
These policies will have to be supplemented by the adoption of effective management
techniques in the allocation of resources, proper selection and phasing of projects and
programmes and close monitoring of programmes. The productivity of public
expenditure programmes can be enhanced considerably if continuous attention is paid
to the flow of expenditure so that appropriate corrective action is taken well in time to
ensure that the benefits expected are fully realised. This can be achieved only if
financial control and management accounting functions are, dovetailed with the-
 7

responsibility for execution of programmes. We are, therefore, contemplating some
structural changes in the financial management system so as to match the authority for
taking decisions with the responsibility for producing results.
 31. The new accounting classification prescribed by the Comptroller and
Auditor General relfects more meaningfully the functions, programmes and activities
of the Government. The Budget is framed on the basis of this new classification. With
this, Performance Budgeting, which is already in vogue, will, I believe, receive a
further impetus and it will be made an effective instrument to measure the efficacy of
the allocation of resources and the returns there from.
 32. The outlay on Defence has been provided at Rs.1915 crores which includes
the provision for additional funds required on account of the acceptance of the
recommendations of the Third Pay Commission. Keeping in view the large requirements
of national defence and security, the provision for Defence could not possibly be kept
at any lower level.
 33. On the side of resources, we have to reckon with the likely adverse impact
of the energy crisis on revenues, though it is difficult to estimate the impact at this
stage with any degree of certainly. As an allowance for this factor, we have assumed
some deceleration in the growth of revenues from excise and customs. Together, these
two sources are expected to yield Rs.3769 crores in 1974-75 as compared to Rs.3608
crores in 1973-74 according to the revised estimates. The estimated yield from direct
taxes is Rs.1423 crores as against Rs.1354 crores in 1973-74 revised estimates.
 34. The progress in small savings collections is gratifying and estimates for
1974-75 are placed at Rs.360 crores. The estimated net receipts from market borrowings
at Rs.498 crores also show a marginal improvement over 1973-74.
 35. Taking into account all the provisions for expenditure and the estimates
of resources, the budgetary gap at existing rates of taxes will amount to Rs.311 crores.
The House will naturally be anxious to know as to how I propose to meet this gap. I
now turn to this task.




