SPEECH OF SHRI Y.B.CHAVAN MINISTER OF FINANCE INTRODUCING
 THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1973-74


 Sir,
 I rise to present the Revised Estimates for 1972-73 and the Budget Estimates for
1973-74.
 2. The budget of the Central Government is not merely an exercise in
balancing revenue and expenditure. Its primary role today is to be a major instrument
for the realisation of our basic social and economic objectives. This Government is
firmly committed to accelerated economic growth in a framework of greater social
justice and self-reliance. The budget proposals which I shall present later in my speech
are aimed at achieving these basic objectives. For a proper appreciation of these budget
proposals in the broad context of the strategy for realising these objectives, it is
necessary to bear in mind, as background, the state of the economy in 1972-73 and the
economic prospects for 1973-74. The Economic Survey which was presented to
Parliament a few days ago covers this territory fairly extensively. I shall, therefore, be
brief in describing the salient features of the current economic situation.
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
 3. With the return of refugees to their homeland and the emergence of
Bangladesh as a friendly independent sovereign country, we had hoped that 1972-73
would be a year in which we would devote our entire energy and resources to the
unfinished task of economic and social reconstruction and development. We did
certainly recognise from the beginning that 1972-73 was not going to be an easy year
for the economy. In the course of my budget speech last year, I had pointed out that
while the resilience and the strength displayed by the economy in 1971-72 could give
us confidence, there was little room for complacency. I had at that time warned that
the events of 1971-72 would continue to cast their shadow in 1972-73. The strains and
stresses through which the economy has had to pass in the current year could not,
however, be wholly foreseen at that time.
 4. Once again there was a failure of the monsoon in the summer of 1972
which created severe drought and scarcity conditions in several parts of the country.
This has led to extensive loss of crops, shortage of fodder, and paucity of drinking
water, creating conditions of grave hardship and suffering in parts of the country. The
Government has been deeply concerned over the human suffering resulting from these
unprecedented adverse conditions, in order to meet this challenge a large effort has
been made to provide the maximum resources possible for the relief of those living in
 1

the affected areas, and we will have to continue these efforts so long as they are
required. Unfortunately, this is the second year in succession that the production of
food grains during the kharif season suffered a serious set-back. This has adversely
affected the procurement of grain for distribution by Government. The drought has
also adversely affected the production of important commercial crops, such as oil
seeds and raw jute. As a result, imbalances in certain strategic sectors of the economy
producing the basic necessities of life have been magnified.
 5. The abnormal increase in prices that took place in the current year is
basically a reflection of these imbalances. The wholesale prices index during the
period April 1972 to the end of January 1973 registered an increase of 9.1 per cent, as
compared to an increase of 3.7 per cent during the corresponding period of 1971-72.
The rise in the prices of food articles was the crucial factor contributing to the increase
in the index of wholesale prices. I am very conscious of the fact that movements in
prices during the current year have added greatly to the hardships suffered by the
weaker and more vulnerable sections of our society. A major thrust of the policy of
this Government is to reduce these hardships.
 6. I do not intend to describe in detail the measures adopted by the
Government to arrest the price rise and to relieve the distress caused by the drought.
Honourable Members are aware of the determined efforts made by the Central and
State Governments to stand by the people affected by the drought. Whatever resources
in terms of money are required are being made available. The public distribution
system has been strengthened. A country-wise emergency programme was launched to
increase agricultural production in the current rabi season to offset the loss of kharif
output for which Rs.190 crores were made available to the States. On present indications
the production of food grains during the rabi season will register a significant increase,
and I am confident this will result in a reduction of the pressure on prices. As a
precautionary measure the Government has arranged to import about two million tonnes
of food grains during the early part of 1973 at a cost of about Rs.160 crores in foreign
exchange. But there is no scope for complacency. The emerging price trends will have
to be kept under continuous watch. Arrangements for procurement and public
distribution will have to be further strengthened and steamlined.
 7. The events of the current year have brought into sharp focus the continued
heavy dependence of Indian agriculture on the rains. This is a pointed reminder of the
urgent need to expand the area under irrigation and to evolve suitable techniques of
dry farming as essential elements of an agricultural strategy designed to reduce the
instability of crop production. The large scale distress in the drought affected areas
has served to emphasise once again the pressing need for better regional balance, and
evenness in the level of development.
 8. Against this background the sharp acceleration in the rate of growth of
industrial production during the current year is heartening. On present indications the

 2

index of industrial production will register an increase of close to 7 per cent over the
year, against an increase of 4.5 per cent in the previous year. But for a continuing
shortage of power, the outcome would have been still more favourable. While a large
number of industries have contributed to industrial recovery, the rapid growth of textiles,
after a decline in the preceding year, was the most important favourable factor. Sustained
growth in industrial production in the coming year will require a more broad based
effort than in the past.
 9. I am glad to say that the export front looks encouraging. Exports increased
by 23 per cent during the first eight months of 1972-73. This is a good performance,
particularly when allowance is made for the uncertainties that have prevailed in
exchange markets during the greater part of the current year. It would be well to
remember, however, that our exports were helped by certain factors whose continuation
cannot be taken for granted. The exports of engineering goods on which we had
Placed high hopes have lost some of their earlier momentum. Some of the principal
factors, like lesser utilisation of external assistance and large payments for imports of
food grains and industrial inputs like iron and steel, oil, and fertilizer, are likely to
exert greater pressure on our foreign exchange reserves. Clearly, foreign exchange is
still a major constraint on our development. If self-reliance is to become a living
reality, there must be a massive increase in our exports, coupled with adequate expansion
in the domestic production of such vital import substitutes as iron and steel and
fertilizers, and increased efforts in exploring indigenous sources of supply of oil. The
behaviour of agricultural production, both of food grains and commercial crops, will
also be a major determinant of the state of our balance of payments.
 10. Despite a rapid growth of industrial production and of exports, the growth
of real national income in the current year is likely to be small due mainly to lack of
adequate growth in the agricultural sector. In order to retain a proper perspective of
the situation, it must not be forgotten that fluctuations in national income are not an
uncommon. phenomenon in countries heavily dependent on agriculture. Such
fluctuations must not lead us to draw pessimistic conclusions about the country’s
basic economic health, or its development potential and prospects, which are sound.
 11. As the Honourable Members know, the Government, after a careful
assessment of all relevant factors, has fixed the growth target for the Fifth Plan at 5.5
per cent per annum. The criticism is made that this target is too ambitious considering
past trends. I am, however, entirely unable to accept that the target is unrealistic.
Purposeful planning, after all, is not simply an extrapolation of past trends. The political
and economic development of India since independence has belted the gloomy
prophecies of many a distinguished commentator. More than once it has been
demonstrated that the economy and polity of India have the resilence to bear hard
shocks and emerge even stronger. The events of 1971 are an impressive indication of
what can be achieved by collective will properly channelised. The task now before the
nation is to bring a similar sense of discipline, determination, and hard work to bear
on its quest for a better quality of life for the common man and a self-reliant economy.
 3

 12. The immediate tasks for the economy may be summarised as follows:
Firstly, inflationary pressures have to be contained through a judicious combination of
demand management, increased production of basic wage goods, and the strengthening
of the public distribution system. Secondly, in order to improve growth prospects,
vigorous efforts have to be made to increase the rate of savings and investment. The
third most important task is to achieve greater viability on the external front, which
can only be achieved through higher exports and restraint on imports. Fourthly, there
must be a rapid increase, in employment opportunities, both in rural and urban areas,
to make an adequate dent on the problem of unemployment. Determined efforts are
necessary to reduce disparities in income and consumption. Finally, to secure greater
social justice, programmes designed to provide minimum basic amenities to all citizens
must be expanded in scope and coverage. These are the principal tasks which I have
kept in mind in framing the budget proposals for 1973-74.
REVISED ESTIMATES: 1972-73
 13. The set back in the agricultural sector due to the failure of the monsoons
had its inevitable impact on the budgetary position of the Government during the
current year. A sum of Rs.150 crores had to be provided for assistance to States
chiefly for the development of minor irrigation under the emergency agricultural
production programmes. In addition, the provision for short-term loans for seeds,
fertilizers, and pesticides, was raised from Rs.60 crores to Rs.100 crores. Relief
operations had to be organised on a massive scale in all the areas affected by natural
calamities. The provision for assistance to States for relief of natural calamities had to
be stepped up from Rs.75 crores to Rs.220 crores. I feel it will be useful to draw up
more effective plans for dealing with drought and natural calamities which unfortunately
are at present a feature of the Indian economic scene.
 14. The Budget made a provision of Rs.720 crores for Central assistance to
States for State Plans. To accelerate the work on certain irrigation and power projects,
and with a view to bridge the gap in Plan resources, it has been decided to step up this
assistance by another Rs.55 crores. In addition, special accommodation by way of
loans continued to be provided to certain States to meet inescapable deficits in their
non-Plan accounts and for specified projects. The Additional burden on the Central
Budget on this account in the current year is likely to be Rs.153 crores. It was necessary
to make this enhanced special accommodation as, otherwise, the resources available
to such States for implementing their Plan would have been reduced.
 15. I had mentioned in my budget speech last year that a scheme for liquidation
of overdrafts taken by the States had been evolved in consultation with the Reserve
Bank of India to ensure that overdrafts were not used by States as a mode of financing
their expenditure. The scheme was put into operation with effect from 1st May, 1972
and has worked effectively during the year. I wish to say that we could not have
solved the problem of States’ overdrafts but for the cooperation extended by the State
Governments in this matter. However, this was not achieved without paying a price.
 4

The overdrafts to States, amounting to Rs.642 crores at the end of April, 1972, were
cleared by providing ways and means advances and advance release of payments due
to States. A small portion of these ways and means advances has been recovered in the
course of the year and the recovery of the balance amount of Rs.421 crores will be
spread over the next few years. This arrangement really represents the taking over of
the past deficits of State Governments on to the books of the Central Government with
a corresponding adjustment in the books of the State Governments, thus increasing,
though notionally, the deficit in the Central Budget by this same Rs.421 crores.
 16. The Defence Expenditure for the current year, now estimated at Rs.1600
crores, shows an increase of Rs.192 crores as compared to the original Budget provision
of Rs.1408 crores. Other commitments contributing to expenditure higher than estimated
in the budget proposals this year are - additional food subsidy to the extent of about
Rs.17 crores, payments on account of the take over of general insurance, coking and
non-coking coal mines and the indian Copper Corporation to the extent of Rs.56
crores, and, Rs.18 crores for rehabilitation assistance to about 8 lakhs people on the
Western front affected by December 1971 war with Pakistan.
 17. Honourable Members will, however, be glad to know that we have not
allowed these unforeseen and heavy commitments on account of drought relief and
emergency production programmes to come in the way of Plan expenditure. The Budget
for 1972-73 had provided for a big step-up in the Plan outlay. Taking Central and
Union Territories Plans and assistance to State Plans together, the provision was Rs.2624
crores, which represented an increase of nearly Rs.500 crores over the 1971-72 Plan
provision. I am glad to be able to say that there will not be any material shortfall in
Plan expenditure this year. On the other hand, the Railways’ Plan expenditure for the
year will register an increase of Rs.34 crores over the budget estimates.
 18. Special Nutrition Schemes started in 1970-71 for providing supplemental
nutrition to vulnerable sections of the population have gained momentum, and currently
32 lakhs pre-school children and expectant and nursing mothers in urban slums, tribal
areas and rural areas are deriving benefit from them.
 19. The scheme for provision of home-sites to workers in rural areas is also
gathering momentum. Central assistance for providing over 2 lakhs house-sites has
already been sanctioned. States are also assured of assistance for Basti, improvement
schemes on the analogy of the Calcutta improvement Scheme.
 20. Receipts under income and Corporation taxes are now estimated at Rs.83
crores more than the Budget Estimates. Customs revenue may exceed the Budget
Estimates, by Rs.90 crores. Union Excise duties may, however, show a decline of
Rs.37 crores as compared to the Budget Estimates because production may be affected
on account of prevailing drought conditions and the power shortage.
 21. In order to meet the heavy commitments to the States and to mop up the
surplus investible funds of the banks and other financial institutions, we have taken
 5

recourse to three additional floatations of market loans during the current year. As a
result, there will be an improvement in the receipts under this head by Rs.263 crores
the realisation being Rs.478 crores, against the provision of Rs.215 crores made in the
original Budget proposals. Collections under the various Small Savings Schemes are
now expected to reach Rs.300 crores, as against Rs.230 crores assumed in the Budget.
 22. After taking all these changes into account, the overall budgetary deficit
will still be Rs.550 crores. This figures excludes Rs.421 crores of loans to States for
clearance of their overdrafts till the end of last year. A deficit of this order, despite
large scale additional resource mobilisation, was inescapable due to the extremely
difficult situation caused by the drought and the resultant shortfall in food grains
production involving unexpectedly heavy spending on drought relief and on the
emergency agricultural production programmes.
BUDGET ESTIMATES: 1973-74
 23. Let me now turn from a narration of the past to the future. As we leave
behind 1972-73 and turn to 1973-74, our main objective is to fulfil the remaining
commitments of the Fourth Plan and to provide a firm base for the launching of the
Fifth Five Year Plan in 1974-75.
 24. In the background of the strong inflationary pressures prevailing in the
economy, it is not easy to reconcile the requirements of growth with the requirements
of stability. However, my general approach has been that the stability to be aimed at
must be the stability of a growing economy. I believe that a solution which seeks
stability by cutting down expenditure which adds to the productive capacity of the
economy is in the long run self-defeating. In an economy where there is considerable
unemployment such an approach would aggravate the inequitable distribution of income
between those who are fully employed and the unemployed. For these reasons the
provisions for development expenditure have been stepped up in the last three years
notwithstanding the severe stresses through which the economy has had to pass in this
period.
 25. In 1973-74 a provision of Rs.1924 crores for the Central Plan is being
made which will be Rs.137 crores larger than the 1972-73 Budget provision. In
addition to this, a provision of Rs.810 crores for Central assistance to State Plans is
being made which represents an increase of Rs.35 crores over the 1972-73 provision.
With a Plan provision of Rs.110 crores for Union Territories, the original estimated
requirement for Union Territories for the Fourth Plan will also be fulfilled. The Plan
provision in the Budget next year taking together Central and Union Territories
Plans, as well as Central assistance to State Plans will be Rs.2844 crores as against
Rs.2624 crores in 1972-73.
 26. As Honourable Members are aware, a number of significant initiatives
have been taken in the past three years to reorient our approach to the Plan so as to
combine the objective of promoting rapid economic growth with the ideal of securing

 6

greater social justice and the well being of the needy and the poor. For this purpose,
in continuation of earlier measures like the nutrition programme for children, rural
water supply schemes, social security benefits for industrial workers, and schemes for
rural employment, an amount of Rs.125 crores was earmarked for a new package of
welfare measures in 1972-73 Budget. Important schemes introduced during 1972-73
were special employment programmes for both educated and uneducated unemployed
- Rs.60 crores, expansion of primary education - Rs.30 crores, slum improvement and
rural home sites - Rs.20 crores, and rural water supply - Rs.15 crores. These schemes
are an essential component of our development strategy of growth, subserving the
cause of social justice. They have now gathered momentum and are yielding beneficial
results. We have, therefore, decided to provide in the 1973-74 Budget the same amount
of Rs.125 crores for continuation of these schemes in the Central Plan.
 27. There are a number of ongoing schemes which form the core of the Plan
and provide the necessary infrastructure for our industry and commerce. We have to
find resources for these. The Plan provision for power is being increased from Rs.88
crores this year to Rs.115 crores next year. Provision for increasing production capacity
in the field of fertilizers and chemicals is being fixed at Rs.134 crores, as against
Rs.95 crores in the 1972-73 Plan. Honourable Members will agree with me that an
increased supply of power and of such critical inputs as fertilizers will have a highly
favourable effect on the growth in agriculture and industry.
 28. A word would be appropriate here about the Differential interest Rates
Scheme. Honourable Members will recall that on the 25th March last year I made a
policy statement in this House in regard to public sector banks starting a scheme of
lending at a concessional rate of interest for helping certain categories of persons in
the low income brackets in their productive endeavours. The Reserve Bank issued the
guidelines for the scheme in June 1972, and thereafter banks started operating a pilot
scheme. Later, when progress was reviewed it was felt there was need for making
some adjustments in the scheme. After considering all aspects I have decided to
announce the following changes in the scheme.
 29. The pilot scheme was confined to 163 industrially backward districts,
excluding those which were covered by the Small Farmers Development Agency and
the Marginal Farmers and Agricultural Labour Schemes. The scheme will now be
applicable to Small Farmers Development Agency/Marginal Farmers and Agricultural
Labour Schemes districts also, and in an will be operated in 265 districts covering
three-fourths of all districts in the country. Institutions for physically handicapped
persons, and orphanages and women’s homes, irrespective of their place of location,
will hereafter be eligible to borrow at the concessional rate, provided the funds thus
obtained by them are used purely for productive schemes, and not for meeting their
normal expenses. In the pilot schemes, the income limit for eligibility had been fixed
at not more than Rs.2,000 per annum per family in urban and semi-urban areas, and
Rs.1,200 per annum per family in the rural areas. I am increasing this limit to Rs.3,000
 7

for urban and semi-urban areas, and Rs.2.000 for rural areas. I have also decided to
make a change in regard to the ceilings for loans under the scheme. The ceiling for
working capital loans, which was earlier Rs.500, is now being raised to Rs.1,500, and
for term loans from Rs.2,500 to Rs.5,000. With these liberalisations I hope the scheme
will be able to make a better impact.
 30. Despite the progress made by the schemes already initiated for providing
employment, and the efforts made both by Central and State Governments, what has
been done so far has not been commensurate with the magnitude of the problem.
Clearly, this is a field for fresh initiatives and greater concerted effort in the years to
come. Government is particularly concerned about the growing unemployment among
educated persons. In order to make a further dent on this problem it is proposed to
undertake new programmes which will generate employment opportunities for an
additional half a million educated persons in various fields and will at the same time
help in the creation of durable assets, collection and compilation of valuable data, and
training of an adequate number of persons to help in implementing the new programmes
and projects that will be introduced in the Fifth Plan. For this purpose, a provision of
Rs.100 crores has been set apart in 1973-74 Budget. But for the constraint of resources,
I would have been happier to allocate a much larger sum for this purpose.
 31. Another significant step which to being taken is the provision of Rs.150
crores for ‘advance action’ on the Fifth Plan. This will ensure that when the Plan is
launched we are in a position to get the benefits of Plan programmes within the Plan
period itself. The next Plan envisages a much larger investment both in agriculture
and key and basic industries, as well as industries producing goods for mass
consumption. If the projected growth rate is to be achieved within the policy framework
of self-reliance it is essential that projects of critical importance to the economy are
completed according to schedule and attain full capacity output within the shortest
possible time. The advance action on the Fifth Plan proposed in the 1973-74 Budget
is designed to facilitate this outcome.
 32. In addition to the provisions made in the Budget, resources will also be
available from the internal resources of the public sector enterprises, and by way of
contributions from financial institutions. Such resources are estimated to yield an
additional Rs.518 crores to the Central Plan for next year, thereby raising resources
for the total Central Plan to Rs.2442 crores.
 33. The State Plans have made satisfactory progress and for this purpose
wherever necessary the Central Government has been providing help over and above
the Central assistance for State Plans. With the provision of Rs.119 crores in 1973-74
Budget, the total expenditure on special accommodation to States during the Fourth
Plan will be in excess of Rs.800 crores which was the estimate in the original Plan.
The total State and Union Territories Plan outlay as worked out after discussions
between the States, Planning Commission and Finance Ministry will be of the order of
Rs.1914 crores as against Rs.1704 crores during the current year.
 8

 34. Taking the Central Plan with its internal resources as well as the State and
Union Territories Plans, the total Plan outlay in 1973-74 will be Rs.4356 crores as
against Rs.4011 crores during the current year.
 35. On the non-Plan side due care has been taken to restrict the growth of
expenditure to the minimum level. Defence expenditure is retained at the same level
as in current year, namely, Rs.1600 crores. Special accommodation to the States will
be of the order of Rs.119 crores and this should enable them to fulfil their Plan targets.
In addition to this, a sum of Rs.79 crores will be given as loans to States for financing
certain specific projects outside the State Plans. As a precautionary measure I am also
providing Rs.100 crores for assistance to States for meeting expenditure on natural
calamities relief. I shall be a happy man if it is not needed.
 36. The report of the Third Pay Commission is yet to be received. Government
share the anxiety of the Honourable Members and of Central Government employees
that the report, when received, should be considered and acted upon expeditiously. In
the absence of the report, it has not been possible to make any specific provision for
meeting the expenditure arising out of recommendations yet to be made. On receipt of
the report, and subsequent to whatever decisions may be taken on its recommendations,
Supplementary Grants to the extent necessary will be taken for the additional
requirements.
 37. On the resources side, income-tax and corporation tax at current levels of
taxation, are expected to show an improvement of Rs.80 crores, and Union Excise
Duties Rs.196 crores. Small Savings are continuing to show progress in collections
and are expected to yield Rs.325 crores next year, as compared to Rs.300 crores this
year. Repayments of loans by the States next year will also be higher in view of the
massive loan assistance extended to them this year.
 38. I am glad to confirm that the Refugee Relief Levies will be withdrawn
with effect from 1st April, 1973. Necessary legislation for this purpose will be
introduced separately before the end of this financial year.
 39. After taking into account the improvement in revenue, the increased outlays
on the Plan, and other commitments, the year 1973-74 will, at the existing levels of
taxation, show a deficit of Rs.335 crores. This figure makes no allowance for
requirements arising out of the coming report of the Pay Commission.
 40. Honourable Members, I am sure, will agree with me that in the present
inflationary situation which the economy faces, the size of the deficit must be kept to
a low level. In order to accomplish that, it becomes necessary for me to make proposals
for increased taxation which will reduce this deficit. Now I shall deal with these
proposals.



 9

