SPEECH OF SHRI MORARJI R.DESAI, DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND
MINISTER OF FINANCE, INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR
 1969-70
 Sir,
 I rise to present the first Budget of the Fourth Plan period. In doing so, I feel
somewhat handicapped as the Plan document is not yet available to Honourable
Members. I am, therefore, left to perform the traditional role of a Sutradhar who must
make a brief appearance on the stage before the start of the play to arouse the interest
of the audience. I hope 1 will not disappoint Honourable Members at least on the
score of brevity.
INTRODUCTION
 2. The year that is now drawing to a close has been a good one for the Indian
economy. The expectation in my last Budget speech that, given the right policies,
1968-69 could become a year of revival has been largely fulfilled. For the second year
in succession, It should be possible to reap a satisfactory harvest. There are distinct
signs of an industrial revival and industrial Production should register an increase of
almost 6 per cent. Transport activity and trade have revived; and there have been no
serious shortages of power or raw materials. The general price level now is somewhat
lower than last year. There has been a remarkable increase in exports. Imports are now
being replaced by domestic production over a wide front as a result of the efforts
made over successive Plan periods. Despite heavier repayment obligations and
somewhat lower utilization of foreign aid than in 1967-68, It should be possible to
close the current year without any material variation in our foreign exchange reserves.
Against this background of a new dynamism in agriculture, industrial revival, restoration
of Price stability and progress towards self-reliance, It is possible now to approach the
next Plan period with a measure of confidence. All the same, there are a number of
factors which limit considerably the area of choice before us in the immediate future.
 3. While food production has increased, we have still a long way to go
before we can assure satisfactory levels of consumption for our growing population.
Imports of agricultural raw materials and foodgrains are still sizeable. Investments in
agriculture, including those in research, inputs such as fertilizers and water and provision
of credit and storage facilities must, therefore, have a prior claim on our limited
resources matched only by the attention to family planning.
 4. The substantial development of capital goods industries that has already
taken place makes it necessary as well as feasible to step up investment outlays. But
rising levels of investment can be achieved without inflation only on the basis of a
growing volume of production of essential consumer goods. This requires not only a
 1

steady Improvement in agricultural productivity but also greater efficiency and
expansion of capacity in consumer goods industries. Attention to these industries is all
the more important as they help stimulate the motivation for higher productivity and
contribute to growth of public revenues.
 5. In a year that is dedicated to the memory of the Father of the Nation, we
cannot but remind ourselves that the ultimate objective of economic development is to
serve certain larger social values. We have, therefore, to respond also to the natural
urge of our people for basic amenities, such as drinking water, for education and
medical aid, for opportunity to work and indeed for a growing measure of equality in
general which is the essence of a socialist society.
 6. On the external front, the improvement has been as notable as it is welcome;
yet, export earnings amount only to two-thirds of cur current import requirements.
There cannot, therefore, be any complacency in regard to export promotion or Import
substitution. The abnormal circumstances of 1965-66 and 1966-67 have led to a decline
in the rate of saving in the economy. Despite substantial efforts to mobilize resources
and considerable restraint on expenditure, the financial position of the Government
has weakened over the past few years.
 7. In short, general economic conditions in the country are propitious for
resuming the threads of progress over a wide front during the next Plan period. Equally,
however, there is need for the right balance between consumption and investment,
resources and outlays, economic growth on the one hand and external viability on the
other and indeed between larger social values and purely economic considerations.
Honourable Members will now appreciate why economic planners are often regarded
as some of the finest exponents of the art of tight-rope dancing.
REVISED ESTIMATES 1968-69
 8. Having outlined briefly the current economic situation and the tasks ahead
without, I hope, stealing the show from the Planning Commission, I must now turn to
the more mundane matters which fall to the lot of Finance Ministers. In the Revised
Estimates for 1968-69, customs revenue will show a shortfall of Rs.94 crores as
compared to the Estimates presented last February. Union excise duties and income-tax,
on the other hand, are expected to yield Rs.54 crores more. After making allowance
for non-tax revenues, total revenue receipts accruing to the Centre are likely to show
a shortfall of Rs.11 crores only as compared to the anticipated realisation of Rs.2760
crores.
 9. Revenue expenditures are likely to exceed the Budget Estimates of Rs.2629
crores by Rs.116 crores. Almost half of this increase, however, represents a purely
accounting change which is balanced by a corresponding gain on capital account.
Another Rs.49 crores is accounted for by additional defence expenditure on revenue
account. This is the result of increases granted daring the year in allowances to certain
categories of service personnel, the dearness allowance which became due last
 2

September, the recent decision to merge a part of the dearness allowance with pay and
speedier deliveries of stores against existing orders. On capital account, there has
been a reduction in defence expenditure of Rs.13 crores. Honourable Members would
see that barring the increase under defence and transactions of a purely accounting
nature, revenue expenditure has been held within less than 1 per cent margin of the
Budget Estimates.
 10. On capital account, the variations have been of a more substantial order.
Net external assistance will show a shortfall of Rs.121 crores and PL 480 and other
food aid a shortfall of Rs.43 crores. This would be offset to an extent by Improvement
under market loans, reduction in the provision for transactions in foodgrains and
fertilizers and some shortfall in Plan outlays. There are also a number of variations in
other Items which make on balance for an Improvement in the resources position.
 11. In the aggregate, the budgetary deficit this year is now estimated at Rs.260
crores as against Rs.290 crores in the Budget Estimates. Honourable Members, I am
sure, would not consider this 10 per cent variation in deficit financing as an index of
conservative budgeting on my part.
BUDGET ESTIMATES 1969-70
 12. In the Budget Estimates for 1969-70, I have assumed that at existing rates
of taxation, total revenues accruing to the Centre will increase by Rs.151 crores. I
anticipate a further decline in customs receipts from Rs.445 crores this year to Rs.426
crores in 1969-70. This reduction is based on the expectation that while there would
be some increase in total non-food imports, there would be a shift away from items
such as petroleum products which bear duties at a higher rate. Union excise duties are
expected to show an increase of Rs.101 crores. Corporate and income taxes should
yield Rs.675 crores as against Rs.660 crores this year. Non-tax revenues should also
yield Rs.50 crores more.
 13. The increase in revenue will, however, be more than absorbed by increases
in expenditure on revenue account. Defence expenditure on revenue account will be
more by Rs.42 crores. Excluding certain accounting adjustments, the non-Plan civil
expenditure will be more by Rs.142 crores. Of this Rs.41 crores are accounted for by
interest charges. The Fifth Finance Commission’s recommendations have necessitated
an additional devolution of Rs.36 crores to the States. Committed expenditure arising
out of completed Plan schemes has meant an increase of nearly Rs.35 crores. Export
promotion measures account for another increase of Rs.10 crores. Various miscellaneous
Items, including administrative services, tax collection and assistance to neighbouring
countries account for the rest of the increase. Detailed explanations have, as usual,
been given in the Explanatory Memorandum.
 14. On capital account, net market borrowings next year are estimated at
Rs.106 crores as against Rs.81 crores this year. Small savings are placed at its.135
crores, i.e., Rs.10 crores more, but of this nearly two-thirds will accrue to the States.
 3

The Public Provident Fund should yield Rs.5 crores next year as against Rs.2 crores
this year. On the other hand, as the author of the once famous but now almost forgotten
Compulsory Deposit Scheme. I propose to redeem myself by making full provision of
Rs.25 crores for the repayment of the deposits made in 1963-64.
 15. Net external aid, excluding PL 480 and other food aid, should show a
marginal increase from Rs.459 crores this year to Rs.467 crores in 1969-70. While
debt repayments would be larger, we expect an increase in aid disbursements also
mainly as.a result of resumption of aid by the International Development Association.
 16. In December 1968, we signed an agreement with the United States
Government under PL 480 for the import of 2.3 million tonnes of foodgrains. In
addition, we have continued to receive food assistance of a sizeable order from Canada
as also some assistance under the International Grain Arrangement from Australia and
the U.K. A substantial part of the food assistance thus negotiated will result in imports
only next year. Honourable Members would also appreciate that arrangements for the
concessional imports of foodgrains and agricultural raw materials will be necessary
for some more time. Consequently, the net budgetary support accruing as a result of
PL 480 transactions and other food aid, excluding PL 480 grants already accounted
for in the revenue estimates, is placed at Rs.224 crores next year as against Rs.226
crores this year.
 17. The improvements under internal borrowing and external assistance, just
mentioned, i.e., Rs.13 crores in all, will be more than absorbed by the increase in
defence expenditure on capital account, Rs.17 crores and on border roads, Rs.4 crores.
 18. As regards other capital transactions, the food and fertilizer transactions
together show an Improvement of Rs.76 crores. Total stocks of foodgrains with the
Food Corporation at the end of March 1969 should be of the order of 3.5 million
tonnes. During the coming year, we propose to add another 1.5 million tonnes to these
stocks. It is our intention to provide budgetary resources of Rs.25 crores in 1969-70
for this purpose. The balance of the requirements will be provided by way of
accommodation to the Food Corporation from commercial banks.
 19. The Improvement under foodgrains and fertilizer transactions, however,
will be wiped out by the increases in revenue and capital expenditure already mentioned
and worsening under various miscellaneous debt-deposit heads. I have also had to
provide for some relief to States by way of adjustment in their repayments to the
Centre and assistance towards the non-Plan gaps of some of the States to enable them
to undertake a satisfactory Plan next year. In the net, the resources available, at the
existing rates of taxation and on the basis of the likely availability of internal borrowing
and external assistance, leave practically no margin for increasing the provision for
the Plan to be financed through the Centre’s Budget next year.
 20. The budgetary contribution of public sector undertakings next year is also
not likely to show any significant Improvement over the current year. The question of
 4

better functioning of public sector undertakings has been examined in detail by the
Administrative Reforms Commission as well as by the Bureau of Public Enterprises
Government have already taken a number of decisions to Improve the working of
these enterprises and I am separately circulating a memorandum on this subject to
Honourable Members.
 21. Honourable Members may well ask whether the margin of resources
available for the Plan could not have been increased by economies in non-Plan
expenditure. I have given the most careful thought to this question in framing the
expenditure estimates for the coming year. But Honourable Members would appreciate
that a certain increase in non-Plan expenditure is inevitable as It arises from contractual
obligations or decisions already taken. The transfer of completed Plan schemes to the
non-Plan side, interest charges, export promotion, the incidence of dearness allowance,
the merger of dearness allowance with pay and the recommendations of the Finance
Commission which belong to this category account for the bulk of the increase in civil
expenditure. The increase of Rs.59 crores in defence expenditure is explained mainly
by normal increases in salaries and pensions, the additional dearness allowance which
became due last September, merger of dearness allowance with pay, additional equity
investment in the production units under the charge of the Defence Ministry and
larger deliveries against contracts already entered into.
 22. I should perhaps also say a word at this stage about the scope for deficit
financing next year. This scope cannot be defined in terms of the needs of the Budget.
It has to be determined in relation to the needs of the economy in the light of the likely
growth in production and the saving habits of the people. Taking everything into
account, I have come to the conclusion that a budgetary deficit next year of roughly
the same magnitude as this year is likely to reconcile best the concern for price stability
and the maintenance, of a climate for growth.
 23. It is against this background that 1 come now to my proposals for resource
mobilization for the coming year. In framing these proposals, however, I have not
adopted the simple approach of deciding first on a certain desired level of Plan outlay
and of proceeding then to raise resources on the required scale. There are limits beyond
which resources cannot be raised in the short-run without impairing the functioning of
the economy. Equally, the annual Budget has to take into account not only the needs
of the year but the requirements of long-term growth as well. The approach, in other
words, has to be one of making such changes in the tax structure as are necessary and
feasible to build up the ability of the Government-and even more important of the
economy in general-to sustain progressively larger developmental outlays and of limiting
the expenditure proposals in the short-run to the total resources that can be so mobilised.
 24. Honourable Members would now naturally be anxious to see how well I
measure up to my own standards. I hope that in passing judgement, the customary
indulgence towards Finance Ministers will not be denied to me merely because this

 5

predicament of being held up before my own mirror is not altogether unfamiliar to me
in this Honourable House.




