 SPEECH OF SHRI PRANAB MUKHERJEE MINISTER OF FINANCE
 INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1983-84


Sir,
 I rise to present the Budget for the year 1983-84.
 2. The Economic Survey for 1982-83, placed before the House a few days
ago, has given a detailed account of the trends in Indian economy during the current
year. I shall, therefore, be brief in reviewing the economic situation..
 3. A drought year is always a difficult one for the economy. The decline in
agricultural production that the drought entails has an effect which goes beyond the
rural sector. The drop in the purchasing power of our farmers exerts a deflationary
influence on industry. The drought also affects power ‘generation and has an adverse
impact on the external payments. It reduces the resource base and at the same time it
calls for an increase in relief expenditure. The performance of the Indian economy in
the year that is ending has to be viewed against this background. That we have come
through it without too much damage to our productive structure and achieved remarkable
success in containing price inflation is a tribute to the resilience of our economy. It
also demonstrates the effectiveness of our policies of continued demand restraint and
judicious supply management.
 4. Although the growth in gross domestic product this year will be lower
than it has been in the two previous years, we will-achieve an average growth rate of
nearly 5 per cent over the three years, which is close to the target we set for ourselves
in the Plan. At the same time, we have been able to maintain the tempo of investment.
In other words, serious as has been the impact of drought, I believe we have not
allowed it to affect the pace of development.
 5. Let me now recapitulate the main highlights of the economic situation in
1982-83. On a point-to-point basis, the increase in the wholesale prices in the last
week of January was 3 per cent com- pared with the annual rate of inflation of 5.7 per
cent at the same time last year. The annual rate of increase in the consumer price
index, as of December 1982, was also significantly lower - 8 per cent as against 12.7
per cent in December, 1981. The lower rate of inflation this year is particularly
noteworthy considering that wholesale prices had increased on an average by 2.4 per
cent per month in June and July 1982 because of speculative pressures generated by
the delay in the monsoon. However, as a result of an appropriate mix of demand and
supply management policies, the situation was speedily brought under control.
 6. Monetary policy continued to be deployed flexibly. The emphasis was on
 1

the need for restraint while at the same time it sought to meet productive requirements
for credit. On the supply side, action was taken to build up stocks and improve
availability of foodgrains through timely imports. Procurement efforts were stepped
up so that the impact of a fall in the kharif output on stocks of foodgrains could be
minimised. Higher releases of sugar and edible oils were also arranged. These and
other supply management policies contributed significantly to the dampening of
inflationary pressures after August 1982.
 7. As I have so often emphasised in this House in respect of the price situation,
there can be no room for complacency. The supply and demand situation in respect of
sensitive commodities remains in delicate balance. While we have successfully
weathered the immediate impact of the drought, we must remember that its effects are
likely to be spread over a longer period than one season or one year. The international
situation continues to be full of uncertainty and should there be a resurgence of inflation
abroad, particularly in respect of commodities that we import, it could easily disturb
our domestic price situation. We must also remain vigilant against anti-social elements,
hoarders and black marketeers.
 8. The kharif foodgrains production will be lower than last year because of
adverse weather conditions. The indications, however, are that the rabi production
may be somewhat better than last year. The output of cotton is likely to be close to
the level of last year, while some decrease is expected in sugarcane and jute
production. The target of 2.35 million hectares for increase in the irrigation potential
in 1982-83 is likely to be achieved. While the agricultural sector continues to be
influenced by the vagaries of the weather, over the long run, we have been able to
increase output significantly and to reduce the disruptive effects of a drought on the
economy. This has demonstrated the basic soundness of our agricultural strategy of
extending the irrigated areas, encouraging the use of fertilisers and high yielding
varieties, widening the credit network, and ensuring fair and remunerative producer
prices for the major crops.
 9. Industrial production increased by 8.6 per cent in 1981-82. In the current
year, the increase is likely to be about 4.5 per cent. For the period, April to December
1982, impressive increases were recorded in respect of critical industries, such as
crude petroleum, which increased .by 30.6 per cent, cement (10.2 per cent), fertilisers
(9.6 per cent), and power generation (7.2 per cent). It is particularly heartening that
thermal generation has shown substantial improvement and the plant load factor of
thermal plants has also improved from 45.9 per cent during April - December 1981 to
47.6 per cent this year. Sugar production is expected to be close to the record level of
last year. The overall rate of growth in industrial production was, however, adversely
affected by a sharp drop in output of cotton cloth and yarn. Certain other sectors of
industry also showed relatively low rates of growth because of slack demand or factors
such as power constraints particularly in areas dependent on hydro-electricity.
 10. Over the last thirty years significant progress has been made in expanding
 2

and diversifying our industrial structure he investment climate is highly favourable
and capital issues during the year have reached a record level. However, In order to
accelerate and sustain a higher growth rate of production, it is essential that the corporate
sector should pay greater attention to improving its own rate of savings by better
utilisation of capacity and economy in conspicuous and wasteful expenditure. If the
increasing requirements of funds for investment are to be adequately met, the corporate
sector must learn to look towards a larger volume of internal generation of resources.
Borrowing can only supplement and not substitute corporate savings.
 11. It is also essential to improve the productivity of past investments and
reduce costs. Capital costs in the economy have increased, and due to delay in the
implementation of projects, there is a decline in the returns that the community can
legitimately monitor closely project implementation and operational efficiency. As
Hon’ble Members are aware, there has been a marked improvement in the working of
many public sector enterprises though some units continue to face problems. Net
profits of public sector units in the first nine months of this year increased to about
Rs.360 crores compared with Rs.134 crores during the same period last year.
 12. The process of building up the financial infrastructure continues apace.
The banking system has been extending its coverage to the rural areas; more rural
banks have been opened and the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
has commenced operations. All this would help to extend further the benefits of the
institutional credit to the rural sector. Considerable progress has also been achieved in
extending insurance to rural areas.
 13. In the past few years, our balance of payments situation has been a matter
of concern. In my budget speech last year, I had taken the opportunity to indicate the
Government’s strategy for restoring the viability in our balance of payments in the
medium term. Briefly, the main elements of the strategy are to accelerate the pace of
import substitution in critical sectors such as oil and fertilisers, to increase exports,
and to improve the facilities available for remittances and investments by non-residents
of Indian origin. The House would be happy to know that we have achieved considerable
success in implementing this strategy.
 14. The substantial increases in domestic production of petroleum and
fertilisers have enabled us to reduce our dependence on imports of these items in the
current year. imports of steel, non-ferrous metals, and several other items have also
been lower. import policy has sought to combine the objective of reducing the growth
of imports with the need to continue the liberal access to raw materials and capital
goods for priority sectors. Tariff policies are being effectively used to provide further
protection to indigenous industries, wherever appropriate.
 15. Exports, which increased by 16 per cent in 1981-82, have shown a further
growth of 18 per cent in the first seven months of 1982-83. This is good performance
considering the uncongenial external environment marked by rising protectionism,
 3

demand recession and near stagnation in world trade. The trade deficit is likely to be
lower in 1982-83. The rate of decline in our reserves, excluding International Monetary
Fund transactions, has also come down and has averaged Rs.91 crores per month in
this financial year up to end of January 1983 compared with Rs.175 crores per month
during 1981-82.
 16. Our balance of payments adjustment has however, been made more difficult
by an unfavourable international environment characterised by lack of political will in
industrialised countries for economic cooperation. It is necessary that in association
with the developing and other non-aligned countries, we continue to work for basic
reform in the international financial and trading system. India also has had to bear a
disproportionate reduction in its share of concessional flows. In this situation, while
recourse to a certain amount of commercial loans is unavoidable, we have to be
extremely circumspect in relying upon this source as a means of financing current
account deficits.
 17. Hon’ble, Members are aware of the geopolitical situation in the region
and the increasing burden cast upon us because of the threat to our national security.
No sacrifice is too great where the nation’s security is concerned. At the same time,
we cannot afford to slacken the development effort, however onerous the task may be
as in the ultimate analysis, the nation’s security rests on economic strength. Despite a
difficult resource situation, I am happy to inform the House that we were able to
achieve a substantial step up in the Plan outlay in 1982-83. The need for further
economy and efficiency in the use of resources can hardly be over-emphasised. We
must also continue to press ahead with additional resource mobilisation in a non-
inflationary way.
 18. Fiscal policy has an important role to play in the task of harnessing the
nation’s resources. In addition to appropriate adjustments in tax rates, the necessary
administrative and legal measures are being taken to ensure that all sections of the
community pay their taxes promptly. This Government is determined to plug avenues
for tax evasion and avoidance, and to continue the fight against economic offences.
 19. Raising the living standards of our people is possible only through a
progressive increase in savings and productivity. The Indian people, we must gratefully
acknowledge, have set standards of saving levels remarkable for a low income country.
It is, however, essential that these savings are invested in assets which add to productive
capacity and which directly benefit the people.
 20. In the past three years, several steps have been taken to encourage the
savings habit. The interest rate mechanism and the fiscal instrument have been used to
provide an attractive return on savings in the form of financial assets. In line with the
decision to raise the interest rate on. 5-year bank deposits, announced in October last
year, it has been decided to increase the rate of interest on 5-Year Post Office Time
Deposits and Recurring Deposits from 10.5 per cent to 11.5 per cent per annum.
 4

Similarly, I propose to increase the rate of interest by 1 per cent on Special Deposits
of Employees Provident Fund and other non-Government provident, gratuity and
superannuation funds. The improvement in the rate of return on these deposits would
benefit workers and small savers.
 21. I also propose to liberalise the Public Provident Fund Scheme, which has
become increasingly popular among self-employed and others. Subscribers will be
allowed to continue their accounts beyond 15 years. The limit for annual subscription
is also being raised to Rs.40,000.
 22. In the light of the changes that have taken place in the monetary and
economic situation in the last two years, the Government, in consultation with the
Reserve Bank of India, has reviewed the interest rates on advances by commercial
banks. It has been decided to reduce the ceiling rate of interest from 19.5 per cent to
18 per cent. The structure of interest rate is also being adjusted downwards for the
benefit of agriculture, small scale industry and exports. A separate announcement in
this respect is being made by the Reserve Bank of India.
 23. The Government has provided liberal incentives for attracting remittances
and investments by non-residents of Indian origin. In the light of experience, it has
been decided to improve further the facilities available to non-residents. Last year I
had announced certain important concessions in respect of subscriptions by non-
residents to 6-Year National Savings Certificates, which carry interest at 12 per cent
per annum. In order to further improve their yield, I propose to allow an additional
interest of one per cent on these certificates if these are subscribed for in foreign
exchange. I also have some other important proposals to which I shall refer later. I am
sure that the House will agree with me that our policy frame-work meets the
requirements of non-residents, and that we can look forward to further strengthening
of the bonds that exist between them and this country.
 24. I shall now turn to the Revised estimates for 1982-83 and the Budget
estimates for 1983-84.
REVISED ESTIMATES FOR 1982-83
 25. The Budget estimate for the total expenditure in 1982-83 was Rs.29,219
crores of which Rs.11,345 crores was on Plan account and Rs.17,874 crores on non-
Plan account. As the year progressed, it became evident that we would need to enhance
both these broad categories of expenditure. Despite the strains imposed on the economy
by natural calamities, it has been our endeavour that outlays in respect of long-term
development should not be allowed to suffer. One of my highest priorities, therefore,
has been to protect the Plan and, in the result, the Revised estimates for Central Plan
outlay are Rs.603 crores higher than those originally budgeted.
 26. Railway Plan outlay has been increased by Rs.195 crores, of which
budgetary support will account for Rs.105 crores. The budgetary support for the power
 5

sector will go up by Rs.62 crores, while assistance to National Bank for Agriculture
and Rural Development has been increased by Rs.100 crores. The outlays for schemes
of family welfare have been enhanced by Rs.50 crores. Plan provisions for rural
water supply, agriculture and co-operation have also been stepped up, while the
budgetary support for the Posts and Telegraphs Plan has been increased by Rs.75
crores owing, in this case, to a shortfall in internal resources. As against these increases,
some reductions are expected in relation to Budget estimates of Plan expenditure in a
few sectors. Overall, the budgetary support for the Central Plan is estimated to go up
by Rs.262 crores to Rs.7605 crores.
 27. The Central assistance for State and Union Territory Plans is also being
stepped up by Rs.380 crores, of which Rs.350 crores is the additional advance Plan
assistance to States which have been affected by drought.
 28. Non-Plan expenditure will also be higher in the current year due to several
factors. Non-Plan grants to States will be higher by Rs.214 crores mainly due to
additional assistance of Rs.147 crores for States affected by floods, cyclones and
other natural calamities. Similarly, reflecting the buoyancy in small savings collections,
non-Plan loans to States on this account will be higher by Rs.200 crores. Non-Plan
loans for agricultural inputs have also been increased by Rs.50 crores. The subsidy for
indigenous fertilisers will go up by Rs.200 crores. Additional loans of Rs.209 crores
are required for certain public sector undertakings to enable them to meet their cash
losses and interest and repayment obligations to the Government.
 29. The provision for Defence expenditure will be higher by Rs.250 crores.
To meet the temporary imbalance in the trade covered by Rupee Trade Agreements,
the provision for Technical Credits has to be increased from Rs.80 crores to Rs.1280
crores. The increase in Technical Credits has been due to temporary and exceptional
circumstances, and will be largely reversed during the year. Hon’ble Members will
appreciate that in a year of weak global demand, our long standing trading relationship
with the Socialist countries has been an important element in providing a measure of
stability to our export sector.
 30. Excluding the loan of Rs.1743 crores to States, to which I shall refer
later, the total non-Plan expenditure is likely to go up from Rs.17,874 crores to
Rs.20,511 crores.
 31. Coming to receipts, as I mentioned at the beginning, the drought inevitably
affects the income and resource base of the economy. Despite these adverse effects,
the Budget estimates of receipts from Income-tax and Customs duties are expected to
be realised. However, receipts from Union excise duties may show a shortfall of
Rs.220 crores. Apart from the impact of a lower growth in industrial production, there
has been locking up of some revenues due to pending litigation. Some shortfall in
Corporation tax is also anticipated. The Centre’s net tax revenue after paying the
 6

States’ share of taxes, is estimated at Rs.13,271 crores as against the Budget estimate
of Rs.13,362 crores.
 32. Non-tax revenue is, however, expected to show an improvement of Rs.613
crores mainly due to larger dividend payment by Railways, larger receipts from some
public sector units, recovery from the Indian Dairy Corporation of the value of gift
material supplied to it earlier and larger external grants.
 33. Capital receipts are also estimated to go up from Rs.10,249 crores to
Rs.12,446 crores. Receipts from market loans are estimated at Rs.3800 crores against
the Budget estimate of Rs.3200 crores. As mentioned earlier, the recovery of Technical
Credits will also go up from Rs.90 crores to Rs.1080 crores. The receipts from small
savings are estimated to go up by, Rs.150 crores.
 34. The total receipts are thus estimated to go up from Rs.27, 844 crores to
Rs.30, 563 crores.
 35. Taking into account the above and other variations in receipts and
expenditure, the budgetary deficit in the current year is now estimated at Rs.1935
crores. This excludes the special loan assistance to States of Rs.1743 crores, which
does not have any economic impact in the current year. The larger deficit over Budget
estimates in the current year has to be viewed against the background of weak demand
in certain sectors of the economy. That it has not had a destablising effect on the
economy has been demonstrated by the price behaviour in recent months.
BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR 1983-84
 36. In framing the next year’s Budget, Mr. Speaker, Sir, my aim has been to
provide for a large increase in the Plan outlay so that the pace of development, which
we have assiduously built up, is not retarded. Even this increase, I am acutely aware,
cannot be expected to fully meet the demand from various sectors, however pressing
they may seem. Some reordering of priorities among different objectives and sectors
has, therefore become necessary.
 37. 1 propose to increase the Central Plan outlay to Rs.13,870 crores in 1983-
84 inclusive of a special allocation of Rs.300 crores to which I shall refer later. This
constitutes an increase of 26.1 per cent over the Plan outlay of Rs.11,000 crores in the
Budget estimates for 1982- 83. Coming on top of an increase of 27.6 per cent provided
in the Budget for 1982-83, the proposed increase would enable us to meet our urgent
requirements in critical sectors of the economy, and also provide a special thrust in
respect of programmes meant for the welfare of the weaker sections of the society.
The Central Plan will be financed by a budgetary support of Rs.8390 crores and
internal and extra- budgetary resources of Rs.5480 crores.
 38. Hon’ble Members are aware that the finances of several States have
been under severe strain for some time. While the need for fiscal discipline cannot
be over-emphasised, an important objective of the Central Government has been to
 7

ensure that, despite resource constraints, the State Plans also show a reasonable
order of increase. Hon’ble Members would recall that in June 1982, I decided to
clear States’ closing deficits of the previous year with a medium term loan of Rs.1743
crores. I did so to help the States to readjust their finances and achieve adequate
investment in their plans. In the current year, the Centre has provided nearly Rs.700
crores of assistance to States for drought and flood relief. Further, we have decided
to increase Central assistance to States in the next two years by Rs.1650 crores over
the balance available in the originally approved level. This will augment the Plan
resources of the States. The States have responded by agreeing to enhance their
resource mobilisation efforts.
 39. The total Plan outlay for 1983-84 of the States and Union Territories is
now placed at Rs.11,625 crores. This represents an increase of 16.4 per cent over the
finally approved outlay of Rs.9989 crores in 1982-83, the highest increase so far in
the current plan period. Central assistance for the Plan of the States and Union
Territories will be Rs.4462 crores.
 40. Taken together, the Plan outlays of the Centre, States and Union Territories
for 1983-84 will be Rs.25,495 crores, an increase of 21.5 per cent over the finally
approved outlay of Rs.20,989 crores in 1982-83.
 41. In formulating the 1983-84 Plan, our primary concern has been to provide
maximum support to those projects and programmes which can be of immediate benefit
to the economy, and especially to the weaker sections of society. The outlays for the
Revised 20-Point Programme have been enhanced, and a special thrust is being given
to programmes that benefit the poor directly.
 42. I have also taken the somewhat unconventional step of providing an
additional Rs.300 crores over and above Rs.13,570 crores set apart specifically for the
various schemes in the next year’s Central Plan. This amount will be provided as
grants to the States on the basis of their better performance in implementing specific
programmes. These programmes will benefit the weaker sections of the community
and improve the functioning of the State Electricity Boards. The co-operation of the
States is essential and, wherever appropriate, the guide-lines to be issued, would provide
for matching contributions by them.
 43. Out of this allocation, I am earmarking Rs.125 crores to assist small and
marginal farmers to improve the productivity of their land. My colleague, the Minister
of Agriculture, will be announcing the details of the scheme.
 44. Another Rs.125 crores would be distributed among the States on the basis
of their performance in implementing programmes in Identified areas of high priority,
which the Government will announce later. The assistance for these purposes would
be made available only to those States which demonstrate capacity to achieve targets
over and above those implied in their approved Plans.
 8

 45. I have had occasion in the past to underline the importance of obtaining
maximum returns out of existing investments. The need for increasing the plant load
factors in thermal power stations cannot be over-emphasised. I, therefore, propose
to set apart the balance of Rs.50 crores out of Rs.300 crores for incentive payments
to State Electricity Boards for better performance. Most of the State Electricity Boards
achieved their peak plant load factors during the years 1975-77. Unfortunately, their
recent performance has fallen far short of these levels. I hope that this incentive
would encourage the State Electricity Boards to reach and even surpass their earlier
peaks.
 46. Apart from the above special allocation, the outlay for the 20-Point
Programme in the Central Sector Plan for 1983-84 is Rs.2747 crores representing an
increase of 26.8 per cent over the outlay in the current year’s Plan. The provision for
these schemes in the approved Plan outlay of the States and Union Territories for
1983-84 will be Rs.7332 crores. Hon’ble Members will be happy to know that the
total provision for 20-Point Programme next year will thus exceed Rs.10,000 crores.
 47. Next year’s programme also provides a high priority to agricultural
development. The total outlay for this sector is Rs.608 crores. This includes Rs.200
crores for the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development. Two major
programmes, one for oil seeds development and another for dry land farming, both
important elements in the 20-Point Programme, will also be taken up for implementation
in 1983- 84. Further, a sum of Rs.800 crores is being provided for agricultural
programmes in the approved Plan outlay of the States and Union Territories. The
outlays for irrigation and flood control are also being stepped up to Rs.116 crores in
the Central Plan and Rs.2404 crores in the Plans of the States and Union Territories.
 48. The outlay for the National Rural Employment Programme, Integrated
Rural Development Programme and other schemes of the Ministry of Rural
Development would be Rs.480 crores in 1983- 84 against the likely expenditure of
Rs.419 crores in 1982- 83. The IRDP will enable about three million families in the
rural areas to cross the poverty line. The NREP will create about 350 million man-
days of work in the rural areas. The provision for these programmes will be matched
by the State Governments.
 49. Hon’ble Members are aware that the Government has launched a crash
programme for providing drinking water facilities in all problem villages. The Plan
outlay for 1982-83 visualised an allocation of Rs.127.5 crores by the Centre for the
accelerated rural water supply programme. Having regard to the progress in
implementation the outlay has now been increased to Rs.155 crores. A substantially
higher outlay of Rs.200 crores has been provided for this programme in 1983-84. The
States on their part will be setting apart Rs.319 crores and in all 48,000 more villages
are expected to be covered in 1983-84.
 50. One of the important programmes benefiting children is the Integrated
 9

Child Development Services. With the higher target now set for the Sixth Plan, it is
proposed to extend this scheme to 200 more projects in 1983-84 over and above the
620 projects so far covered. Over half the total provision of Rs.60 crores for Department
of Social Welfare will be accounted for by this scheme.
 51. An increased provision of Rs.176 crores has been made in the Central
Plan for 1983-84 for tile various programmes benefiting the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes.
 52. The Family Welfare Programmes will be implemented with renewed vigour
in 1983-84 and will cover 17 million persons. A sum of Rs.330 crores is being provided
for these programmes.
 53. The Sixth Plan has placed considerable emphasis on accelerating
investment in the Energy sector. The total outlay for this sector covering petroleum,
power and coal would be Rs.5014 crores, accounting for more than 36 per cent of the
total Central Plan outlay. Crude oil production is expected to reach 21 million tonnes
this year, and increase further to around 26 million tonnes in 1983-84.
 54. Inclusive of the allocation for power development under Atomic Energy
and Coal, the total outlay for the various power programmes in 1983-84 in the Central
Plan will be Rs.1222 crores, representing an increase of 31.5 per cent over that for
1982-83. The target for addition to the capacity in 1983-84 in the Central Sector will
be 1050 MW, double that of the current year.
 55. The outlay for Coal sector, including lignite, will be Rs.946 crores in
1983-84. The target for production of coal is 142 million tonnes, 9 million tonnes
more than in the current year.
 56. The provision for the various programmes of the Department of Steel in
the Plan for 1983- 84 is Rs.820 crores. The Plan outlay of the Mines Department has
been increased to R s. 494 crores in 1983-84 compared to Rs.292 crores in the
current year’s approved Plan outlay. This includes Rs.365 crores for the Orissa
Aluminium Project.
 57. The revenue earning traffic to be carried by the Railways in 1983-84 is
projected at 241 million tonnes, which is an increase of more than six per cent over
the likely performance in 1982-83. The Plan outlay for the Railways in 1983-84 is
Rs.1342 crores.
 58. The traffic handled at the ports is expected to increase to 105 million
tonnes in 1983-84 as against 95 million tonnes likely to be reached in 1982-83. Inclusive
of a provision of Rs.90 crores for the Nhava Sheva Project, and Rs.40 crores for
investment in State Road Transport Corporations, a total outlay of Rs.558 crores has
been set apart for the Shipping and Transport Ministry in 1983- 84.
 59. An outlay of Rs.429 crores has been provided for the various projects of
 10

the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. This includes Rs.260 crores for the Thal
Vaishet Fertilizer project. For the Hazira Fertilizer Project a provision of Rs.145 crores
has been made.
 60. The total provision for the projects of the Ministry of Industry in 1983-84
is Rs.549 crores compared with Rs.480 crores in the current year. Of this, the provision
for small industries, including KVIC and coir, is about Rs.173 crores.
 61. A provision of Rs.72 crores has been made for the various Plan programmes
of the Department of Science and Technology and the Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research in 1983-84. The Government has recently set up a separate
Department of Non- Conventional Energy Sources. The programmes to be undertaken
by this Department in 1983-84 would include, inter alia, establishment of 75,000
family size biogas units and 100 community bio-gas units. Inclusive-of the provision
of Rs.18 crores for the bio-gas programme, an outlay of Rs.30 crores has been set
apart for this Department in the Plan for 1983-84.
 62. Mr. Speaker, it has been my effort to contain the growth in the non-Plan
expenditure. However, increases in certain important sectors have been inevitable.
Taking into account the requirements of the country’s defence, a provision of Rs.5971
crores has been made for Defence against Rs.5350 crores in the Revised estimates for
the current year. Due to increase in borrowings which are mainly used for development
purposes and also higher borrowing costs, the provision for interest is placed at Rs.4700
crores against Rs.3950 crores in the Revised estimates for the current year. The provision
for food subsidy at Rs.800 crores will be higher by Rs.90 crores compared with the
Revised estimates for the current year. The provision for subsidy on indigenous
fertilisers is estimated to go up from Rs.550 crores in the current year to Rs.700 crores
next year. A provision of Rs.550 crores has been made for cash compensatory support
and market development assistance for exports.
 63. The provision for Technical Credits under Rupee-Trade Agreements is
Rs.600 crores next year as against Rs.1280 crores in the current year. A lump sum of
Rs.300 crores is being provided in 1983-84 for payment of additional instalments of
dearness allowance, pension and other reliefs to Central Government employees.
 64. The House would recall that last year, I had announced certain enhanced
benefits for low paid pensioners. I propose to provide some additional relief to this
category of pensioners. From lst April 1983, the minimum amount of pension, including
dearness relief, will be raised to Rs.160 per month and the minimum amount of family
pension including dearness relief to Rs.150 per month.
 65. The total non-Plan expenditure in 1983-84 is estimated at Rs.21,984 crores
against Rs.20,511 crores in Revised estimate 1982-83.
 66. At this point I would like to refer to it matter concerning Government
employees. The employees had suggested some time ago that the Government may
 11

appoint a Pay Body for revising pay scales. The Third Pay Commission was appointed
in April 1970 and made its report in 1973. Since then, over the years conditions have
changed in several respects. The employment under the Central Government has grown
steadily larger. Changes have also taken place in the relativities in the emoluments of
the employees of departments inter se, and also vis-a-vis other employees. For instance
several State Governments have, through gay committees or Pay Commissions, sub-
stantially revised the pay scales and other benefits of their employees. The Government
feels it would be appropriate now to appoint the Fourth Central Pay Commission.
Before the terms of reference of the Pay Commission are settled, the representatives
of the employees would be consulted. The membership of the Commission together
with the terms of reference will be announced as soon as possible.
 67. So far as receipts in 1983-84 are concerned, the gross tax revenues at
the existing rates of taxation are estimated at Rs.19,964 crores compared with
Rs.17,910 crores in the Revised estimates. The States’ share of taxes in 1983-84 is
estimated at Rs.5088 crores compared with Rs.4639 crores in the current year. The
net tax revenue of the Centre will thus be Rs.14,876 crores against Rs.13,271 crores
in the current year.
 68. The receipts from market loans are placed at Rs.4000 crores compared
with R s. 3800 crores in the current year. The recoveries of Technical Credits next
year will be lower as the payments will also be less. Small savings collections are
expected to yield Rs.1700 crores next year against Rs.1550 crores this year. External
assistance, net of loan repayments, is estimated at Rs.1940 crores against Rs.1724
crores in the current year.
 69. Taking into account these and other variations in receipts, the total receipts
for 1983-84 are estimated at Rs.32,586 crores. These receipts include the effect of the
changes in fare and freight rates of the Railways and in the Posts and Telegraphs
tariffs as well as the continuance of the Compulsory Deposit Scheme for income-tax
payers beyond 31st March 1983, to which I shall refer later. The total expenditure is
placed at Rs.34,836 crores. The overall budgetary gap at existing rates of taxation will
thus be Rs.2250 crores.
