 1




 Budget 1992-93
 Speech of
 Shri Manmohan Singh
 Minister of Finance
 29th February, 1992

 PART A


Sir,
 I rise to present the budget for 1992-93.
 2 . The fiscal year now drawing to a close has been a difficult one by any
standards. It has been a year of crisis and of crisis management. It has also been
a year of great economic challenges and bold new initiatives.
 3 . Honourable Members would recall that when the new Government assumed
office eight months ago, we inherited an economy on the verge of collapse. Inflation
was accelerating rapidly. The balance of payments was in serious trouble. The
foreign exchange reserves were barely enough for two weeks of imports. Foreign
commercial banks had stopped lending to India. Non-Resident Indians were
withdrawing their deposits. Shortages of foreign exchange had forced a massive
import squeeze, which had halted the rapid industrial growth of earlier years and
had produced negative growth rates from May 1991 onwards.
 4. This is the grim legacy we inherited.
 5 . Our first and immediate challenge was to arrest the slide and restore
India’s credibility both domestically and in the eyes of the world. To achieve this
objective we had to take immediate measures to avert a default in international
payments and also take steps to restore macro-economic balance in the economy
in the short run, with a view to controlling inflation and reducing the balance of
payments deficit to a manageable level. Our medium term objective was to place
the economy back on the path of high and sustainable growth.
 6 . The new Government took several initiatives in pursuit of these objectives.
We took emergency measures to prevent a default in external payments, which
would have been highly disruptive. The previous Government had already decided
to use a part of the gold held by the Reserve Bank of India to mobilise temporary
liquidity abroad. We did not consider it prudent to reverse this decision. But we
promised to redeem the gold at the earliest opportunity and we have kept our word.

 1

 2
We began the process of restoring macro-economic balance by seeking to reduce
the fiscal deficit which had grown very large in the previous year. We also embarked
on a medium term programme of structural reform, including new initiatives in
trade policy and industrial policy aimed at improving the efficiency, productivity
and international competitiveness of Indian industry. Our longer term objective is
to evolve a pattern of production which is labour intensive and generates larger
employment opportunities in productive higher income jobs, and reduces the
disparities in income and wealth between rural and urban areas.
 7 . Production was bound to suffer in a year of crisis and this has happened
in 1991-92. Agricultural production was below target in the kharif season, but
prospects for the rabi crop look good. Industrial production suffered because of
severe import compression and tight credit conditions. However, the infrastructure
sectors, which are the foundation on which future industrial growth depends, have
done well. Overall, I expect GDP growth in 1991-92 to be around 2.5%. I expect a
distinct improvement in 1992-93, and a return to high growth in 1993-94. However,
this revival can be achieved only if we persevere unflinchingly with the process of
stabilisation and economic reform begun in the current year.
 8 . Stabilisation and structural adjustment are never painless or quick,
especially when we are dealing with imbalances and structural rigidities which
have built up over several years. It will take sustained effort, over at least three
years, to bring the economy back to a path of rapid and sustainable growth. A firm
commitment to austerity, the pursuit of excellence and the promotion of efficiency
and productivity for the benefit of the common people has to be an integral part of
this effort. Given our limited resources, our people cannot afford to copy the soulless
consumerism and the wasteful life styles of the affluent countries of the West.
Conspicuous consumption has to be actively discouraged. The virtues of thrift have
to be emphasised. The owners of wealth, as Gandhiji used to say, must learn to
regard themselves as trustees of society. We cannot postpone structural reform
and adjustment, but we must ensure that the burden of adjustment on the poorer
and weaker sections of our society is ameliorated to the maximum possible extent.
We are travelling through difficult and uncharted terrain, where no action is without
attendant risks, and success will not always be immediate. We need patience,
perseverance and national cohesion if we are to succeed.
 9 . It has been alleged by some people that the reform programme has been
dictated by the IMF and the World Bank. We are founder members of these two
institutions and it is our right to borrow from them when we need assistance in
support of our programmes. As lenders, they are required to satisfy themselves
about our capacity to repay loans and this is where conditionality comes into the
picture. All borrowing countries hold discussions with these institutions on the
viability of the programmes for which assistance is sought. We have also held such
discussions. The extent of conditionality depends on the amount and the type of
assistance sought. However, I wish to state categorically that the conditions we
have accepted reflect no more than the implementation of the reform programme
as outlined in my letters of intent sent to the IMF and the World Bank, and are
wholly consistent with our national interests. The bulk of the reform programme is
based on the election manifesto of our Party. There is no question of the Government
ever compromising our national interests, not to speak of our sovereignty.

 3
 1 0 . Although the full fruit of our policies will take time to materialise, I am
happy to report to the House that we have made substantial progress even in this
short space of eight months. We have achieved our most immediate objective of
restoring India’s credibility and pulling the economy back from the slide into financial
chaos. Our foreign exchange reserves have been rebuilt to about Rs.11,000 crores.
Non-Resident Indians are no longer withdrawing their deposits. We have successfully
concluded arrangements with multi-lateral financing institutions such as the IMF,
the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank to obtain quick disbursing funds
to support the balance of payments in the current year.
 1 1 . Inflation remains a difficult problem, and one to which we attach the
highest priority, because inflation hurts the poor and the fixed income earner most
of all. Inflation was accelerating in June 1991, when our Government came to
power, and the annual rate of inflation reached a peak of 16.7% in August 1991.
Since then, the rate of inflation has come down to about 12%, but I am painfully
conscious that this is still far too high. We are determined to bring inflation under
control. This is why the Budget for 1991-92 focussed on the need for fiscal discipline.
I am confident that as we persevere with fiscal discipline in 1992-93, and this we
must do if we want to bring prices under control, the rate of inflation will come
down substantially in the coming fiscal year.
 1 2 . Our ability to fight inflation has been considerably enhanced by the
improvement in our foreign exchange reserves. This has enabled us to relax the
restrictions imposed last year on imports, thus ensuring near normal availability of
essential imports in the months ahead. This will help production and ease inflationary
pressure. The comfortable reserves position has also given the Government greater
flexibility to finance additional imports of essential items to deal with shortages
and break inflationary expectations.
 1 3 . The Government will remain fully vigilant on the prices front and will use
the Public Distribution System to counter inflation and in particular to protect the
poorer sections of the population from high prices and shortages. The Prime Minister
announced on 1st January this year the launching of the revamped Public
Distribution System in about 1700 of the most backward blocks of the country. We
are determined to ensure that foodgrains and essential commodities reach the poor
and the under-privileged in adequate quantities and at affordable prices.
 1 4 . Next to inflation, our major problem in the short term is the management
of the balance of payments. We have averted collapse and gained some flexibility,
but a sustained improvement in our external payments position requires much
more. Our export earnings have suffered badly this year, mainly because of the
disruption of trade with the former Soviet Union, and also because of recessionary
conditions in world markets. As a result, we have not been able to finance our
normal import requirements.
 1 5 . There are some who argue that all we need to do to solve our balance of
payments problem is to compress our imports. I would like to point out that import
compression has already been carried to the extreme and any further compression
can only be at the cost of both growth and employment. Imports of non-essential
consumer goods should certainly continue to be discouraged. However, we must
recognise that the only lasting solution to our balance of payments problem lies not
in compressing imports but in a rapid expansion of exports. A growing economy

 4
needs a growing volume of imports of fuel, and other industrial inputs and also of
capital goods embodying modern technology. This is not to deny the importance of
self-reliance, but self-reliance in today’s world of integrated global markets cannot
be achieved merely by reducing import dependence and insulating the economy
from the world. Following that path will only lead to more import controls and
promote inefficiency and corruption. It will perpetuate an environment in which
Indian entrepreneurs will not have the flexibility they need to compete with other
developing countries in world markets. The resulting inability to export will actually
make us more, rather than less, dependent on the outside world. Our vision of a
self-reliant economy should be of an economy which can meet all its import
requirements through exports, without undue dependence on artificial external
props such as foreign aid. I suggest to this august House that this is precisely the
vision of self-reliance as bequeathed to us by Jawaharlal Nehru as elaborated in
the Third Five Year Plan, and translated to the realities of today’s world.
 1 6 . While introducing the new trade policy last year, Government had indicated
that it would be our objective to move towards convertibility of the rupee on the
current account. The achievement of convertibility is a sign of economic strength
and true self reliance. We are now ready to take the next important step in this
direction by introducing a new system of partial convertibility. The new system is
designed to provide a powerful boost to our exports as well as to efficient import
substitution. It will further reduce the scope for bureaucratic controls which
contribute to both inefficiency and corruption. It will also greatly reduce the incentive
for illegal transactions in foreign exchange. Under the new system all foreign
exchange remittances, whether earned through exports of goods or services, or
remittances, will be converted into rupees in the following manner: 40% of the
foreign exchange remitted will be converted at the official exchange rate while the
remaining 60% will be converted at a market determined rate. The foreign exchange
surrendered at official exchange rates will be available to meet the foreign exchange
requirements of essential imports such as petroleum and oil products, fertilisers,
defence and life saving drugs. All other imports of raw materials, components and
also capital goods will be made freely importable on open General Licence but the
foreign exchange for these imports will have to be obtained from the market. There
will be a specified ‘negative list’ of raw materials, components and capital goods
which will continue to be importable only against licences. There will be no change
in the import policy for consumer goods which will remain restricted as at present.
Foreign exchange required for other payments on private account including travel,
debt service payments, dividends, royalties and other remittances will also have to
be obtained at the market rate.
 1 7 . The new system will replace the system of Eximscrips. There will be no
need to issue Eximscrips for each export transaction as the new system will operate
through the banks. Instead of a premium on Eximscrips, exporters will have the
benefit of the premium on 60% of their earnings in the foreign exchange market.
What is more, the incentive for earning foreign exchange will now be available to
remittances from our workers abroad. There is no reason why our workers, who
earn foreign exchange by the sweat of their hard labour abroad, should be denied
incentives presently given to exporters of goods and professional services. I salute
our workers from Kerala and other states working abroad. What I have announced
today is a small token of our appreciation of their magnificent contribution to
India’s foreign exchange earnings.

 5
 1 8 . With these changes we will have achieved a major simplification of trade
policy, eliminating licensing and the associated bureaucratic delays and inefficiencies
over a wide range of items. We will also have introduced a self-balancing system to
manage a large part of the balance of payments. The total volume of imports will be
automatically regulated by the available volume of foreign exchange. Scarcity of
foreign exchange will be reflected in a premium which will accrue to exporters and
to those making remittances thus providing a built in incentive to increase this
flow. The details of the new exchange system are being notified by the Reserve
Bank of India. The changes in trade policy are being notified separately by the
Commerce Ministry.
 1 9 . One of the reasons why foreign exchange is diverted to illegal channels is
the illegal import of gold. It is time we took a bold step to recognise the realities of
the situation and legalise the import of gold. Government proposes to allow returning
Indians and NRIs to import 5kg of gold per passenger with a modest import duty
provided the gold as well as the import duty is financed from foreign exchange
earned abroad.
 2 0 . Many Honourable Members of this House have suggested that the
Government should introduce a Gold Bond, which would help to mobilise the idle
gold resources of ordinary citizens to supplement official reserves. I had indicated
in Parliament that this should be considered only when the balance of payments
situation improves, and adequate confidence has been built in the capacity of the
Government to manage the economy. This has now been achieved. Our reserves
are large and do not need supplementing, but I see no reason why patriotic citizens
should be denied the opportunity to contribute their mite to the development of
India’s economy. I propose to introduce a scheme under which citizens can obtain
a Gold Bond in return for gold. The bond would be for a period of five to seven
years and would be liquidated by return of gold, or equivalent value, at the option
of the holder. It would enjoy a small interest, which will not attract income-tax. The
bonds will also be free of wealth tax and gift tax. As an added incentive, holders of
such bonds will not be asked any questions about the source of the gold holding.
The Reserve Bank of India is preparing a detailed proposal along these lines.
 2 1 . One of the initiatives of the new Industrial Policy is a new approach towards
foreign investment, which can play a vital role in upgrading our technology levels,
integrating our industry into the global economy, and bringing in non-debt resources.
The Government proposes to actively encourage foreign investment in critical
infrastructure sectors where capacities are inadequate and needs for investment
are large. A policy to encourage private investment, including foreign investment,
in the Power sector has already been announced. Another area which is critical for
our future development, and for management of the balance of payments, is the
hydro-carbon sector. Government has already announced that joint ventures will
be permitted in both exploration and development, including development of existing
fields. The Government will welcome proposals for private investment, including
foreign investment, in production, refining and marketing of oil and gas, with a
view to maximising the growth potential of this crucial area.
 2 2 . Concern is sometimes expressed that the policy of welcoming foreign
investment will hurt Indian industry and may jeopardise our sovereignty. These
fears are misplaced. We must not remain permanent captives of a fear of the East

 6
India Company, as if nothing has changed in the past 300 years! India as a nation
is capable of dealing with foreign investors on its own terms. Indian industry has
also come of age, and is now ready to enter a phase where it can both compete with
foreign investment, and also cooperate with it. This is the trend all over the world
and we cannot afford to be left out. The House can rest assured that we have
enough policy instruments at our disposal to ensure that enterprises with foreign
equity function in accordance with our national priorities.
 2 3 . The new approach to industrial policy calls for a review of regulations
such as the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, which introduced a great deal of
detailed administrative control over companies where the foreign equity exceeded
40% and also on non-resident Indians. The Reserve Bank of India has recently
liberalised the procedure by granting general exemption from several of these controls
applicable to Indian companies with foreign equity and to non-resident Indians
returning to India. There are other restrictions which prevent Indian companies
and Indian residents from entering into various types of commercial relations with
companies abroad without prior approval. These provisions are out of line with the
needs of today’s economy, where Indian businesses will have to deal extensively
with their counterparts abroad, requiring expeditious decision making. The
Government proposes to introduce comprehensive amendments to the Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act to bring it in line with the requirements of the new policy.
 2 4 . In my Budget speech last year I had referred to the importance of financial
sector reform and had announced the establishment of a Committee on the Financial
System. The Narasimham Committee has submitted its report which has been
tabled in Parliament. While commending the progress made by the banking system
in several directions, the Committee has drawn attention to serious problems posed
by the deterioration in the financial health of the system because of low profitability,
poor portfolio quality and inadequate provisioning for bad debts. The Committee
has made comprehensive recommendations for reform covering all aspects of
banking, including the introduction of better capital adequacy norms, better
provisioning for bad debts, rationalisation of the provisions for directed lending
and the associated interest rate structure. The thrust of the Committee’s
recommendations is to move to a more efficient and competitive banking system
including a larger role for the private sector. Many of the recommendations can be
implemented very quickly. Others need further consideration. The Government
proposes to implement the recommendations of the Committee in a phased manner.
 2 5 . As a first step in implementing the recommendations of the Narasimham
Committee, the Government has decided to begin a phased reduction in the Statutory
Liquidity Ratio (SLR) which at present locks up large quantities of bank funds in
relatively low yielding Government securities. Accordingly, the SLR on incremental
domestic liabilities of the commercial banks is being reduced from 38.5% to 30%
with effect from 1992-93. This reduction is in line with the proposed reduction in
the fiscal deficit, which will reduce the Central Government’s need to borrow from
commercial banks. It will release funds for banks to expand credit to agriculture
and industry. The market borrowing of the States will not be affected. Steps are
also being taken to develop an active market for Government securities which will
make Government less dependent on statutory borrowing from the banks in future.
 2 6 . In view of the decline that has already taken place in the rate of inflation,

 7
it is possible to provide some relief in the interest rates charged by the Banks on
commercial advances. Honourable Members will be pleased to know that the Reserve
Bank of India is separately notifying a reduction in the floor level of interest rates
on commercial advances by one percentage point.
 2 7 . Financial sector reform also includes reform of the capital markets, which
will increasingly play a vital role in mobilising and allocating resources from the
public. Several initiatives announced in my Budget speech last year have since
been implemented. The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), has now
been established on a statutory basis. As we gain experience, additional powers
will be given to SEBI to strengthen its capability. The Government has also issued
guidelines which will govern the operation of new private sector mutual funds.
Government has also decided to give permission to companies with a good track
record to issue convertible debentures or equity to investors abroad and to extend
to these issues the same tax benefits as are available for Offshore Mutual Funds.
This will enable domestic companies to tap the large pool of equity funds available
in world capital markets. We will also consider ways of allowing reputable foreign
investors, such as pension funds, to invest in our capital markets, with suitable
mechanisms to ensure that this does not threaten loss of management control.
 2 8 . The role of the Controller of Capital Issues in the Finance Ministry needs
to be reviewed, especially in the context of the emerging industrial and financial
scenario. The practice of Government control over capital issues, as well as over
pricing of issues, has lost its relevance in the changed circumstances of today. It is
therefore proposed to do away with Government control over capital issues including
premium fixation. Companies will be allowed to approach the market directly
provided the issues are in conformity with published guidelines relating to disclosure
and other matters related to investor protection. Government proposes to bring
necessary legislation to implement this decision.
 2 9 . In presenting the Budget for 1991-92 I had announced the Government’s
intention to establish a National Renewal Fund with the objective of ensuring that
the cost of technological change and modernisation does not fall too heavily on the
workers. This Fund was intended to provide a social safety net which would protect
the workers from the adverse consequences of technological transformation. The
Government has now established the Fund. The Fund will provide assistance to
cover the cost of retraining and redeployment of labour arising as a result of
modernisation and restructuring, and also provide compensation to labour affected
by restructuring of an industrial unit. Government also proposes to approach
multilateral financial institutions to meet part of the requirement for the National
Renewal Fund. It is estimated that about Rs.1000 crores would be available from
the International Development Association to be used for social safety net schemes
under the Fund including special schemes for unorganised sector workers. In this
context we would work out a scheme to upgrade the technology of handicrafts
which employ a very large number of people in the decentralised sector. Honourable
Members may rest assured that the Government is firmly resolved to protect the
interests of labour while dealing with the problems of industrial sickness and
structural reforms.
 3 0 . Agriculture is the foundation of our national prosperity and no strategy of
economic development can succeed in our country if it does not ensure rapid
growth of production and employment in agriculture. Nor can we hope to provide

 8
sufficient jobs for our growing rural labour force unless we can transform the
economy of our rural areas. This calls for a multi-pronged strategy involving effective
implementation of land reforms, large investments in irrigation and drainage,
improvement in water management systems, control of land degradation,
strengthening of the credit system and improvements in agricultural extension and
research. Much of this effort has to be made by the State Governments since
Agriculture is a State subject, and it is our hope that State Governments will give
these issues the highest priority. The Centre on its part is firmly committed to
continued funding and revamping of the various poverty alleviation schemes, which
are a major element in our development strategy.
 3 1 . Special attention needs to be paid to supporting innovative ideas for
generating income and employment in rural areas through support to various types
of agri-business. As an experimental measure, Government proposes to set up a
Small Farmers’ Agri-Business Consortium as an autonomous corporate entity funded
by the Reserve Bank of India, NABARD and IDBI. The Consortium will include
representation from various Development Boards dealing with individual crops and
Public Sector Corporations dealing with agriculture and agro-industries, private
sector companies, banks, scientific organisations and farmers’ associations. The
Consortium will function on the principles of economic efficiency, environmental
soundness and social equity and will organise 12 major projects in 1992-93 in
different parts of the country, based on a mix of enterprises with active participation
by State Governments and farm families. The programme will be expanded as we
gain experience. We must begin a new chapter in our agricultural history where
farm enterprises yield not only more food, but more productive jobs and higher
income in rural areas.
 3 2 . I now turn to the Revised Estimates for 1991-92. Our major macro-
economic objective in 1991-92 was to reduce the fiscal deficit in order to restore
macro-economic balance in the economy. I am happy to inform the House that we
have succeeded in this objective.
 3 3 . The Budget Estimates for 1991-92 provided for a total expenditure of
Rs.113,422 crores. Unlike in the past, when Revised Estimates of expenditure
showed substantial increases over Budget Estimates, this year they are marginally
lower by Rs.320 crores. On the revenue side there has been a large shortfall of Rs.
3760 crores in customs revenue owing to the severe import compression during
most of the year, but this has been partially offset by higher realisation from excise
duties and income tax so that the shortfall in gross tax revenues is Rs.1869 crores.
The, non-tax revenues and capital receipts are also significantly higher. As a result
total receipts are estimated at Rs.106,070 crores which is higher than the Budget
Estimates of Rs.105,703 crores.
 3 4 . The Budget deficit in the Revised Estimates for 1991-92 is Rs.7032 crores
which is lower than the Budget Estimate of Rs.7719 crores, and much lower than
in 1990-91, when the budget deficit reached Rs.11,347 crores. The fiscal deficit,
which takes into account all borrowing, is Rs.37,792 crores in the Revised Estimates.
This is almost identical to the figure of Rs.37,727 crores in the Budget Estimates,
and is much lower than Rs. 44,650 crores in 1990-91. With this, we have successfully
reduced fiscal deficit from about 8.4% of GDP in 1990-9 to around 6.5% in
1991-92.

 9
 3 5 . The reduction in the deficit was made possible by enforcement of strict
discipline on the expenditure side. Certain additional expenditure provisions became
necessary after the Budget was presented. The most notable of these was the
additional requirement for fertiliser subsidy, consequent on the decision to restrict
the price increase from 40% proposed initially to only 30%, and also the fact that
the rupee cost of imported fertilisers was higher than assumed in the Budget
Estimates. As a result, the provision for fertiliser subsidy has been increased from
Rs.4000 crores in the Budget Estimates to Rs.4800 crores in the Revised Estimates.
Even this amount does not fully cover the subsidy claims for 1991-92 and some
amount will spill over into the next year as is normal commercial practice. A separate
provision of Rs.405 crores has been included in the Revised Estimates for the
scheme for supplying fertilisers to small farmers at the pre-revised prices.
 3 6 . I have also had to increase the Budget provision for food subsidy by
Rs.250 crores on account of the delay in increasing issue prices. An extra amount
of Rs.550 crores has also been provided for the export subsidy. This subsidy was
abolished on 3rd July 1991, but the claims in the pipeline appear to be much more
than was originally anticipated. These demands for additional expenditure have
however been offset by savings located within the sanctioned Budgets of various
Ministries.
 3 7 . The difficult resource position in 1991-92 had its impact on Plan
expenditure. Overall resource constraints forced the Government to restrict Budget
support for the Central Plan and the Revised Estimates for this item are 7% less
than Budget Estimates. Despite the marginal reduction, efforts were made to ensure
that projects of high priority are not affected, and the reduction has been achieved
mainly by regulating the release of funds to match the actual progress of schemes
on the ground. However, Central Assistance for State and UT Plans was stepped up
by Rs. 651 crores, mainly on account of larger rupee requirements of externally
aided projects.
 3 8 . The House will be happy to note that even though the Central Government’s
own expenditure in the Revised Estimates is below the Budget Estimates, the total
transfer to the States by way of share of taxes, and Central Plan assistance is
higher than the Budget Estimates by Rs. 1683 crores. This more than offsets the
shortfall in small savings loans of Rs.1365 crores. We have not allowed our fiscal
difficulties to come in the way of meeting our obligations to the States in any way.
 3 9 . I now turn to the Budget Estimates for 1992-93. The Eighth Five Year
Plan commences from 1st April 1992 and aims at the objective of achieving near
full employment in a period of ten years. The investment requirements of every
sector are large, and it is important that Plan allocations should enable implementing
agencies to make a good start, especially in the infrastructure sectors. However we
have had to work within the limits imposed by the continuing need to restore
macro-economic balance, which is essential if we are to contain inflation and manage
the balance of payments. This calls for a further reduction in the fiscal deficit in
1992-93. Larger Plan expenditure can be accommodated within a smaller fiscal
deficit if, apart from increasing tax and non- tax revenues, Government’s non-Plan
expenditure can be contained. I must admit that this has been a daunting task.
 4 0 . Interest charges are the largest single item of non-Plan expenditure and
account for Rs. 32,000 crores in the Budget Estimates for 1992-93. This represents

 10
an increase of Rs. 4750 crores over the Revised Estimates for 1991-92, which is
larger than the increase in total non-Plan expenditure of Rs. 4405 crores. This
means that in 1992-93 all other items of non-Plan expenditure taken together are
actually lower than in the current year. Honourable Members will appreciate that
interest charges are a committed expenditure, reflecting the cumulative effect of
past deficits. This item can be controlled only by reducing the reliance on borrowed
funds, and I intend to do this by reducing the fiscal deficit for 1992-93. However,
the benefit of this action will be felt only by Finance Ministers presenting the
Budget in future. I venture to think that my successors as Finance Minister will be
able to sleep far more peacefully than has been my lot thus far.
 4 1 . For the Defence Services I am providing Rs. 17,500 crores, an increase of
7% over the provision of Rs. 16,350 crores in the current year. Combined with
some economies and tight expenditure control, I am confident that this allocation
will enable our armed forces to fulfil their responsibilities in ensuring the security
and defence of the nation.
 4 2 . In the election Manifesto of our Party, we had committed ourselves to find
an innovative solution to the long standing demand of Defence pensioners for ‘One
Rank One Pension’. An Empowered Committee, under the chairmanship of Raksha
Mantri and comprising ex-servicemen and Members of Parliament representing the
major political parties has looked into the issue and its recommendations have
been accepted by the Government. Accordingly, Government has sanctioned ad
hoc increase in the pension rates applicable to Defence personnel. This decision
effective from 1.1.92 will benefit over six lakh Armed Forces pensioners of all
ranks, of whom over two lakhs are Jawans, some of whom retired after 1.1.86.
Government has also ordered grant of ex-gratia Family Pension to the families of
deceased Reservists not in receipt of Family Pension. These benefits will entail an
expenditure of over Rs. 120 crores per annum at current rates of dearness relief.
 4 3 . Subsidies are another important component in non-Plan expenditure. Last
year, Food, Fertiliser and Export subsidies were the three major subsidies and
their rapid growth has been one of the main factors behind the unchecked growth
of non-Plan expenditure. We made an important change this year by abolishing
export subsidies. However, some subsidy payments still remain in the pipeline, and
I am providing Rs. 480 crores on this account.
 4 4 . Food subsidy is a part of our system of food security for the poorer and
weaker sections of our population and is a basic element in our social policy. I am
providing an allocation of Rs. 2500 crores on this account which should be sufficient
for the normal requirements of the system. The revamped Public Distribution System
being implemented in 1700 backward blocks will require an additional allocation of
Rs. 250 crores on account of the additional subsidy and also the cost of constructing
a large number of godowns with a capacity of 3 lakh tonnes. The allocation for
these items will be augmented in the course of the year to meet the requirements
fully.
 4 5 . This brings me to fertiliser subsidy which has grown into the largest
single subsidy in our system. There is no doubt that fertiliser is an essential
ingredient for agricultural production, and agricultural development is vital not
only for economic growth in general, but also to ensure rising levels of income and
employment in rural areas. In 1980-81, the fertiliser subsidy was 12% of the total
allocation in the Central and State Plans taken together for Agriculture, Rural

 11
Development, Special Area Programmes and Irrigation and Flood Control. It increased
to 33% in 1991-92. A Parliamentary Committee is currently looking into the whole
issue of fertiliser pricing and subsidy including alternatives for restructuring the
subsidy. I propose to wait for the report of this Committee and take a view, on this
matter later in the year. Taking all factors into account, I am making a provision of
Rs. 5000 crores for fertiliser subsidy in 1992-93.
 4 6 . Other items of non-Plan expenditure have been tightly constrained in the
allocations provided to keep the fiscal deficit within manageable levels. I have
requested my colleagues in all Ministries to review the expenditure control system
in their Ministries to ensure that every possible step is taken to enforce economy
so that the provisions being made in the Budget Estimates are not exceeded. As in
the last two years, in the Budget Estimates for 1992-93 also no separate provision
is being made for the additional dearness allowance installments that may become
payable in that year. All Ministries will be expected to absorb the additional
expenditure on this account within the approved Budget provisions.
 4 7 . With these provisions, the total allocation for non-Plan expenditure stands
at Rs.84,475 crores, higher by Rs. 4,405 crores compared to the Revised Estimates
for 1991-92. But then, as I mentioned earlier, the increase in interest expenditure
alone is Rs.4,750 crores. Honourable Members would appreciate that the large
requirements for interest and subsidies make it difficult to reduce non-Plan
expenditure further and this limits the extent to which the budget can support
Plan expenditure. Nevertheless, I have tried to provide adequately for all the critical
areas of Plan expenditure.
 4 8 . Central assistance for the Plans of States and Union Territories is being
stepped up from Rs. 14,710 crores in Budget Estimates 1991-92 to Rs. 16,111
crores in 1992-93. This increase of Rs. 1401 crores, coupled with an increase of
Rs. 2237 crores in the share of taxes, even at the existing levels of taxation, should
enable the States to substantially increase the allocations for the various Plan
programmes.
 4 9 . The total Central Sector Plan outlay for 1992-93 has been fixed at Rs.48,407
crores. This is based on budgetary support for the Plan of Rs. 18,501 crores, and
a contribution of Rs. 29,906 crores from internal and extra-budgetary resources of
the various undertakings/enterprises. The internal and extra-budgetary resources
show a sharp increase of 25% over the current year’s level and this is critical to
achieve the substantial increase in the Plan outlays of the various infrastructure
sectors. Thus the outlay for the Railways stands increased from Rs. 5325 crores in
the current year’s Budget Estimates to Rs. 5700 crores in the next year’s Plan;
Shipping from Rs. 617 crores to Rs. 1222 crores; Civil Aviation from Rs. 433 crores
to Rs. 1036 crores; Telecommunications from Rs. 3203 crores to Rs. 4500 crores
and Fertiliser industry from Rs. 411 crores to Rs. 1234 crores. The outlay for
Power has been fixed at Rs.6411 crores, and for Petroleum at Rs. 6054 crores.
 5 0 . The allocation for Rural Development Programmes in the Budget is Rs.2610
crores, which is somewhat lower than the Budget Estimates of 1991-92 though it
is higher than the Revised Estimates. This however presents only part of the total
effort we are making in support of the weaker sections in our rural areas. The
Government is deeply conscious of its special responsibility to protect the poorer
sections of our society, especially in rural areas from the burdens that would
otherwise be forced upon them as the economy goes through the process of macro-

 12
economic stabilisation and economic restructuring. It is therefore proposed to
earmark an additional allocation of Rs. 500 crores from the corpus of the National
Renewal Fund for employment generation schemes to supplement the normal
employment generation through the Jawahar Rozgar Yojana, particularly in those
areas where the pressure for such employment is seen to be more than in earlier
years. The additional allocation of foodgrains, through the Public Distribution System
in the 1700 most backward blocks at a subsidised rate is another important step
for protecting these vulnerable sections of society from the pressure on prices.
Taking the proposed additional allocations on these accounts together with the
Plan provision in the Budget, the total allocation to rural development would show
a substantial increase over the current year.
 5 1 . The Plan outlay for the Family Welfare programme has been stepped up
from Rs. 749 crores in the current year to Rs. 1000 crores next year reflecting the
Government’s firm commitment to tackle the population problem. The outlay for
the programmes of the Ministry of Welfare has also been increased from Rs. 479
crores to Rs. 530 crores reflecting fully Government’s commitment to protection of
the weaker sections of society.
 5 2 . Despite severe resource constraints, most of the other sectors which are
largely dependent on budgetary support for their Plan outlays have been provided
at least the same order of budget support as in the current year. I would have liked
to provide more but we also have to live within the constraint of available resources.
I would particularly like to point out that we must give up the practice of judging
the quality of our Plan effort by the increase in the outlays provided for in the
Budget. Our resources are scarce and there is a vast unexploited potential for
improving the productivity of available resource use. There has to be much tighter
scrutiny of various claims on resources and much greater emphasis on how to get
more out of available resources. We cannot simply spend our way into prosperity.
 5 3 . Gross tax receipts at existing rates of taxation are estimated next year at
Rs.75,541 crores compared to Rs. 67,300 crores in the current year’s Revised
Estimates. The States’ share of taxes is placed at Rs. 18,492 crores showing an
increase of Rs.1293 crores over the current year ’s Revised Estimates. Non-tax
revenues next year show an increase of Rs. 2689 crores over the current year ’s
Revised Estimates. This includes Rs. 416 crores of deferred dividends from the
Railways. Next year ’s estimates assume an increase of Rs. 423 crores from dividends
and profits of public sector enterprises. Unlike in the past, it is proposed to ensure
that these enterprises transfer as dividend or surplus profits, a reasonable part of
their post tax profits instead of determining the dividend payable merely on the
basis of capital investment. The Reserve Bank of India will also be transferring a
larger share of its profits.
 5 4 . Under Capital Receipts, I have taken credit for market borrowing of Rs.
5000 crores. This is significantly lower than the amount of Rs. 7500 crores in the
Budget Estimates for the current year and reflects our objective of reducing the
fiscal deficit and consequently the recourse to borrowed funds. External assistance
including grants, but net of repayments, is estimated at Rs. 5374 crores.
 5 5 . The disinvestment in public sector equity undertaken in the current year
has been successfully completed. There is scope for continuing this process in
1992-93 with a view to raising non-inflationary resources for development. I am

 13
accordingly taking credit for a receipt of Rs. 2500 crores from further disinvestment
of equity holding in public sector enterprises. In addition to this amount, Government
will consider a further sale of equity of Rs. 1000 crores to provide resources to the
National Renewal Fund in 1992-93, which can be used for various schemes of
assistance to workers in the unorganised sector, including women workers, who
may be adversely affected by the process of economic restructuring. These resources
will also be used to fund the special employment creating schemes in backward
areas which I have mentioned earlier.
 5 6 . Thus, at existing rates of taxation, total receipts are placed at Rs. 114,
215 crores and total expenditure at Rs. 119,087 crores. This leaves a gap of Rs.
4872 crores.
