 SPEECH OF SHRI VISHWANATH PRATAP SINGH MINISTER OF
 FINANCE INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1986-87


Sir,
 I rise to present the Budget for the year 1986-87.
 2. The Budget is a powerful tool for achieving our socio-economic goals as
laid out in the Plan. Our Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, reminded us not so long
ago:
 “Development must be accompanied by equity and social justice - by
 removal of social barriers that oppress the weak. This is the essence of
 our concept of socialism.
 These objectives have guided the formulation of this Budget.
 3. The economic developments in the current year have been described in
detail in the Economic Survey, which was placed in the House earlier this week.
Therefore, I will confine my remarks to a few key features of our economic performance.
 4. Growth in GNP in 1985-86 is expected to be between 4.5 and 5 per cent,
which is close to the target envisaged in the Seventh Five Year Plan. This is a distinct
improvement over the 3.5 per cent growth estimated for 1984-85. In contrast to the
disappointing agricultural performance in 1984-85, when net output is estimated to
have declined by 1 per cent, growth this year is anticipated to be about 3 per cent.
Food grains production had fallen to 146 million tonnes in 1984-85. Despite drought
in several parts of the country, we expect food output to be about 150 million tonnes
in the current year.
 5. After a slow start, industrial production has picked up and the rate of
growth in October and November, 1985 exceeded 8 per cent. For the financial year as
a whole it is expected that the growth rate will be close to 7 per cent. The acceleration
in growth of industrial output largely reflects higher production in the manufacturing
sector, which had shown low rates of growth in the previous three years. It is heartening
that the production response to changes in industrial policy has been positive.
 6. An important priority of the Government is to improve the functioning of
the infrastructure sectors. I am glad to inform the House that in the first ten months,
thermal power generation registered an increase of more than 15 per cent over the
corresponding period of 1984. Railway freight has also recorded a commendable
increase of 9 per cent in the first eight months of this financial year. This is double the
 1

annual average rate of increase during the Sixth Plan. Despatches of coal increased by
10 per cent in the first eight months.
 7. The increase in the Wholesale Price Index in the current year upto 8th
February, 1986, was 3.4 per cent as against 5.4 per cent last year. Among items of
particular interest to the consumer, the largest increase in wholesale prices has taken
place in wheat, pulses, fruits and vegetables, eggs, fish, meat, sugar and gur. On the
other hand, prices of rice, condiments and spices, tea, coffee and edible oils have
remained stable or have actually declined.
 8. The House will recall that the last Budget ushered in major reforms in our
system of direct taxes. At that time, many a prophets of doom had prophesied that
revenues will fall and buoyancy of the tax system, such as it was, will be further
eroded. Exactly the opposite has happened. Collections from major taxes have increased
by 22 per cent over the previous year, which is the highest increase in a decade.
Collections have also exceeded Budget Estimates by a large margin. What is even
more pertinent is the 36 per cent increase (over Budget Estimates) in personal income
taxes. In the current year, we have succeeded in reversing the declining trend in the
ratio of direct taxes to GNP.
 9. This is a testimony to the soundness of our strategy of increasing revenue
yields through a combination of reasonable rates, simpler procedures and strong
enforcement of tax laws. We have raised more from the rich by way of income-tax,
and not less. The proof of fiscal policy is, not in empty theorising, but in the revenue
that it generates.
 10. The Government has launched an intensive drive against smugglers, black
marketeers and tax evaders. There cannot, and will not, be a compromise on this
score. Those who abuse the nation’s trust must be dealt with firmly and with full force
of the law. Considerable success has already been achieved in curbing the growth of
black money, and Government will spare no effort to root out this evil.
 11. However, I do not propose to dwell only on the strong points of our
economic performance. I would like to take this opportunity to highlight some of the
policy issues and to seek the advice and support of this august House in coming to
grips with them. Let me, therefore, share with you a short list of key problem areas on
which we, in the Government and the Parliament, must take urgent action, both through
this budget and by other means.
 12. The budget is now under severe pressure to meet the growing burden of
expenditure on account of interest payments, defence, subsidies and assistance to
States. An important issue before us is to find sufficient resources for financing the
public sector Plan. This is not a partisan issue or the problem of a particular Government
in power and I believe that a frank debate is essential for the long term economic
health of our nation. In a nutshell, the core of the problem is simply that internal
 2

generation in public sector enterprises is not measuring up to the task of financing a
Plan of the size that is essential for our development.
 13. The severity of the problem can be illustrated by the experience of the
current year. The Seventh Plan visualises that 53 per cent of the Central Plan will be
financed through resources of public enterprises, and 47 per cent will be financed
through the budget. In the first year of the Plan, in view of the paucity of internal
resources, the budget had to finance 66 per cent of the Central Plan, and not 47 per
cent. We have been successful in increasing tax revenues sharply, and beyond Plan
targets. But higher revenues have been more than offset by increase in food and fertiliser
subsidies and assistance to States. The higher budgetary support to the Plan, therefore,
had to come from additional domestic borrowings and higher level of deficit financing.
 14. Collectively, we must address ourselves to the basic issue of raising
resources for the Plan without fuelling the fires of inflation. The Plan is not something
abstract. It is more schools, more roads, more irrigation, more jobs, in a word, more
development. It embodies the hopes and aspirations of our people for a better future.
We cannot slacken our efforts to implement it fully.
 15. Public sector has a key role in bringing about the transformation of our
economic structure. We must work hard to strengthen it. A number of public sector units
in this country are functioning very efficiently and producing surpluses for reinvestment.
These units provide irrefutable evidence that the public sector can perform as well as the
best, given the right set of circumstances. Unfortunately, there are also a number of
public enterprises whose losses have become a drain on the resources of this nation,
which could have otherwise been used for the greater benefit of the common man.
 16. The Government for its part will be taking steps to improve the working
environment of the public sector enterprises, and improve their profitability. But beyond
that, we must involve workers and the management in the task of revitalising the
public sector. This, if any thing, is the need of the hour.
 17. We also have to find a way of reducing the non-Plan expenditure, however
painful it may be. Subsidies serve an important social purpose, and constitute a
legitimate charge on society’s resources. However, the question that we must ask
ourselves is: how fast and how far they can be allowed to grow without cutting into
resources for investment in our future. Food and fertilizer subsidies have now reached
Rs.3,700 crores and have increased by over 40 per cent per annum in the last three
years. Even with buoyant tax revenues, this order of increase is simply not sustainable.
At present rates of growth, these subsidies would have reached Rs.14,000 crores by
the end of the Seventh Plan. At this rate, total subsidies would exceed Rs.41,000
crores for the Plan period. This is equal to the entire Central Plan for the first two
years. To put it in another way, this amount would be sufficient to provide one deep
tube-well and one primary school building in each village of the country. The issue is
what balance to strike.
 3

 18. The Government is initiating a process of thorough review of our
expenditure policies and procedures. We have to cut every rupee of wasteful
expenditure, get more out of every rupee of essential expenditure, and improve
efficiency all round. A full debate on what we can and must do to reduce expenditure
is necessary and I would like to invite the suggestions of the Hon’ble Members on
these issues.
 19. There has been a healthy debate in the country regarding the impact of
administered prices on the inflationary situation. When all other prices are changing,
some changes in administered prices are necessary and inevitable. But the Government
accepts the view that as far as possible there is need to stabilise the prices of critical
commodities. In order to clarify the issues involved, and to initiate an open debate on
the appropriate approach, the Government will present a policy paper on administered
prices to Parliament.
 20. The balance of payments is another area of concern. As I had pointed out
in my Budget speech last year, some of the factors that have worked in our favour in
the 6th Plan will not operate with the same vigour in the 7th Plan. As anticipated,
growth of oil production, which had shown an increase of 18 million tonnes in the 6th
Plan, has slowed down. The world environment for trade and concessional assistance
continues to remain unfavourable. Against this background, it is essential to strengthen,
further the measures to conserve scarce foreign exchange. In particular, we must pursue
a concerted programme for energy conservation, and develop indigenous sources of
energy. In the current year alone we are likely to pay nearly Rs.1,100 crores more for
oil imports. The net foreign exchange outlay on this account may exceed Rs.4,600
crores as against about Rs.3,500 crores in the previous year. Can we afford this?
 21. In order to overcome domestic shortages, we also had to import large
quantities of sugar and edible oils. Policy initiatives have already been taken to
encourage higher domestic production of sugar and edible oils. These have begun to
yield results. The potential for further expansion of output of oilseeds, particularly
minor oilseeds, is immense. Later in my speech, I propose to announce a package of
incentives, which will provide support to domestic cultivators of oilseeds. Our farmers
have responded magnificently to the task of increasing yields and absorbing new
technology. As a result of their effort, we are now self-sufficient in food grains. As
Indiraji so rightly observed:
 “In a country where half the national income comes from farming,
 agricultural self-reliance is the basis of all self-reliance’’.
 22. Export growth is essential to pay for our vital imports without getting into
4 debt trap. The international environment for our exports, however, continues to be
unfavourable with the intensification of protectionist tendencies and a low rate of
growth of the world economy. This makes it all the more necessary that greater impetus
 4

is given to industries which have made important contribution to our export effort.
Several step’s were taken in the last budget for export promotion. I shall be carrying
this process further in the current year’s budget. Separately, the Reserve Bank of India
is announcing further liberalisation of pre-shipment credit facilities for exports.
 23. The Government will keep external borrowings at prudent levels consistent
with our debt-servicing capacity. Our record in this respect has been enviable. And we
intend to keep it that way.
 24. Over the past year, the Government has taken wide ranging steps to
modernise the economy, accelerate industrial growth, encourage more economic scales
of production, upgrade technology and promote rehabilitation of enterprises facing
temporary difficulties. Although the full effect of these recent initiatives will take
time, as I said earlier, these have already had a favourable impact on manufacturing
output. However, overall industrial growth still remains below our full potential. Aside
from further measures to promote overall growth in industrial output and employment,
we have to devote special attention to the domestic capital goods industry. This industry,
has been painstakingly built over decades and makes a valuable contribution to our
self-reliance. It deserves our full support. I shall be making certain proposals in order
to provide further encouragement to the growth of the capital goods industry.
 25. Small scale industry has played a vital role in increasing our exports,
generating employment opportunities, and reducing the concentration of economic
power. It has been truly said that “great engines turn on small pivots.” In order to
provide a focal point for coordinating financial assistance to this sector at the apex
level, it is proposed to set up a separate special fund, called the Small Industries
Development Fund in the IDBI. This Fund will also be charged with the responsibility
of providing refinancing assistance for development, expansion and modernisation of
small scale industry. I also propose to announce a new scheme for excise exemption
for small scale industries which should considerably facilitate their growth.
 26. Agriculture is at the centre of our development strategy. The quality of
agricultural performance is the single most important factor in reducing the incidence
of poverty in rural areas. Through sustained and prolonged efforts we have become a
surplus producer of wheat. But, as our heavy imports of sugar and edible oils testify,
production of some important crops remains inadequate.
 27. Correcting this imbalance in cropping pattern will ease the pressure on
our balance of payments and lead to better use of our agricultural resources. To ensure
that our approach is not ad hoc, we must work towards evolving a longer term policy,
which takes full account of regional differences in yields of different crops. In particular,
the reduction in uncertainty and instability in agricultural prices will provide more
assured incomes for farmers, and thus encourage production response in desired
directions. With a view to providing protection to farmers, last year, a comprehensive
crop insurance scheme was introduced. This year, such a scheme will also be extended
 5

to fruit cultivation. As a further step to reduce uncertainty, I am glad to inform the
House that my colleague, the Hon’ble Minister for Agriculture, has already initiated
work on the formulation of a longer term price policy for important crops in consultation
with agricultural experts and scientists.
 28. Broad-based agricultural development provides the most effective way of
tackling our central problem of poverty. But we must also recognise that the fruits of
development do not always reach the poorest sections of our society, especially in
regions where agricultural development is lagging. For them the best hope for higher
incomes and better living conditions lies with the major anti-poverty programmes of
Integrated Rural Development Programme, National Rural Employment Programme
and Rural Landless Employment Guarantee Programmes. These programmes are at
the forefront of our assault on poverty and for many millions they represent the
difference between the despair of destitution and the hope of gainful employment. In
the next year’s Budget, I shall be proposing an increase of nearly 65 per cent in the
allocation for these programmes. The programme for housing for Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes, announced by me last year is also being strengthened.
 29. Many of the programmes for the welfare of the poor and the needy are the
gifts of our late Prime Minister Smt. Indira Gandhi to the nation. It will be a fitting
tribute to her memory to name the new Housing Scheme for Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes as INDIRA AWAAS YOJANA”.
 30. It is only proper that the banking system, which is the repository of peoples’
savings, should use these savings to further our national objectives, particularly in
respect of poverty alleviation and rural development. I am glad to inform the House
that in the year 1985, the advances of public sector banks to the priority sector reached
43.4 per cent as against the target of 40 per cent. Under the Integrated Rural
Development Programme, banks have advanced loans of Rs.3,100 crores to 16.5 million
persons below the poverty line during the Sixth Plan. In the Seventh Plan, the target
Of the number of beneficiaries is 20 million. Of them, six million will belong to
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
 31. It is also necessary to use our social banking and insurance infrastructure
for tackling the problem of urban poverty. Rickshaw-pullers, cobblers, washermen,
porters, barbers, hawkers, sweepers and cart-pullers are among the particularly
disadvantaged. The Government proposes to introduce a new scheme which will provide
loans through the banking system with a subsidy component, so that the repayment
burden on beneficiaries is effectively reduced. The scheme will provide for purchase
of equipment and loans for working capital for the self-employed. such as, rickshaw-
pullers, cobblers, washermen, barbers, hawkers and cart-pullers. Details of this scheme
are being worked out in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, and will be
announced separately.
 6

 32. I also propose to introduce a new Scheme for accident insurance for the
benefit of Municipal sweepers and Railway porters. This scheme, the details of which
will be announced separately by the Life Insurance Corporation, will provide Group
Insurance through the workers’ unions. The Scheme will provide life insurance cover
of Rs.5,000 with a double accident benefit to the members of a union, provided 75 per
cent of the members agree to join the Scheme.
 33. In the last Budget, I had introduced a Personal Accident Insurance Social
Security Scheme for the poor families in 100 districts of the country. As the Scheme
has been widely welcomed, I propose to extend it now to 200 districts. The Scheme
will cover the risk of death by accident in respect of earning members of poor families
in rural and urban areas comprising landless labourers, small and marginal farmers,
traditional craftsmen, small traders and others. The entire cost of this scheme is borne
by the Central Government.
 34. The true asset of our country is its labour. It was in recognition of this that
last year, I had announced a series of measures for the benefit of industrial and other
workers. These included measures to give workers’ dues the same priority as secured
creditors in the event of closure of companies, the increase in the limit on the salary
or wage on which bonus is payable to employees from Rs.750 per month to Rs.1,600
per month, the introduction of a stock option scheme and increase in the monetary
ceiling on the exempt amount of retrenchment compensation from Rs.20,000 to
Rs.50,000. These proposals were implemented during the year. In addition, the eligibility
limit for bonus payments which was Rs.1,600 earlier was raised to Rs.2,500. We have
also increased the industrial D.A. for public sector employees from Rs.1.30 to Rs.1.65
per point increase in the Consumer Price Index.
 35. It is necessary to improve the return that workers and employees earn on
their hard earned savings. I, therefore, propose to increase the interest rate on
contributions to the Provident Fund. The rate of interest on General Provident Fund
for Government employees is being raised from 10.5 per cent to 12 per cent. To
benefit other workers covered by the Employees Provident Fund, Coal Mines Provident
Fund Act and the like, interest on Provident Fund accretions invested in Special Deposits
with Government is being raised from 11 per cent to 12 per cent. The pattern of
investment is also being changed to permit the funds to invest upto 85 per cent of the
accretions in Special Deposits with Government as against the existing limit of 30 per
cent. I also propose to increase the interest rate from 10 per cent to 12 per cent on
Public Provident Fund which is intended for the self-employed persons and those not
covered by other provident fund schemes.
 36. The expansion of housing is essential for the welfare of workers and their
families. I, therefore, propose to considerably liberalise the depreciation provisions in
respect of outlays on workers’ housing. Government will encourage all industrial units,
large and small, to pay special attention to this area. The Housing and Urban
 7

Development Corporation has been playing an important role in building houses for
economically weaker sections, and providing housing loans at low rates of interest.
The Government will expand assistance to the weaker sections for housing.
 37. In view of the role of construction activity in creating employment
opportunities, while meeting an important and universal social need, Government will
consider suggestions for giving a boost to this activity. We have to ensure that housing
scarcity is reduced by increasing the supply and availability of houses. Tax concessions,
which merely increase the demand for houses without increasing their supply, are
unlikely to be helpful. ‘Mere are several financial and non-financial factors inhibiting
construction activity, and it is necessary to have a thorough debate on these. The
Government would welcome suggestions from the Hon’ble Members and the public
on this question.
 38. Among developing countries, India has the distinction of having one of
die highest rates of savings. This is a tribute to the habits of hard work and thrift of
our people. An important objective of Government policy in the last few years has
been to provide opportunities for investment of these savings in productive channels,
particularly financial assets. These policies have proved remarkably successful, and
today nearly 65 per cent of household savings are being invested in financial assets as
against only 46 per cent in 1979-80. The household sector accounts for over 80 per
cent of our national savings, and the substantial increase in the holding of financial
assets augurs well for the future development of our financial and capital markets.
 39. There is considerable interest among small investors in investing in shares
quoted in the Stock Exchanges with a view to getting the benefit of capital appreciation.
Most, however, lack the necessary expertise and are also subject to exploitation by
unscrupulous elements. In order to provide a channel for such investors, it is proposed
to set up a new Mutual Fund in the public sector as a subsidiary of the Unit Trust of
India. Investment in units of the proposed Mutual Fund would qualify for exemption
of capital gains under Section 54-E of the Income Tax Act, subject to certain conditions.
This will be in addition to the already existing facility of investment in the Units of
the Unit Trust of India.
 40. An important innovation to tap people’s savings, particularly rural savings,
for public sector projects was announced by me last year. Public sector companies in
Telecommunications and Power sectors have been permitted to raise funds from the
public through a new series of bonds. These bonds provide an attractive rate of interest,
and are quoted in the Stock Exchange. As a further innovation, in the next year, the
Government will introduce another series of Public Sector Bonds with a tax free
return. In addition, other benefits, such as Wealth Tax exemption will also be available.
I am sure that people will respond enthusiastically to this opportunity for contributing
to the country’s development.
 8

 41. At this point I would like to refer to a somewhat technical matter, which
nevertheless has an important bearing on the impact of fiscal management on the rest
of the economy. This relates to the measurement of budgetary deficit. The Chakravarty
Committee, which was set up by the Reserve Bank of India to review the working of
the monetary system, has observed that the budgetary deficit, as conventionally defined
in the Budget documents, does not accurately measure the monetary impact of the
Government’s fiscal operations. The Committee has, therefore, recommended that the
budgetary deficit should include changes in the entire RBI credit to the Government,
including changes in RBI’s holding of long dated securities. The Government proposes
to accept, in principle, this recommendation of the Committee. The modalities for
effecting the change in the definition of budgetary deficit will he worked out in
consultation with the Reserve Bank.
 42. The Government also proposes to accept the Committee’s recommendation
for setting overall monetary targets, which can be monitored, and which will help
bring about better coordination between fiscal and monetary policies, and make their
overall management more scientific. There are certain technical difficulties in devising
operational rules because of short-run volatility of monetary variables. An exercise to
develop operationally meaningful targets will be undertaken by Government on an
experimental basis in the next year.
 43. I shall now turn to the Revised Estimates for 1985-86 and the Budget
Estimates for 1986-87.
 44. There were several important developments in regard to Budget Estimates
for Revenue and Expenditure presented by me last year. As I mentioned a little while
ago, tax revenues have exceeded Budget Estimates by a large margin. The Revised
Estimates show an increase of Rs.2476 crores, which is 21 per cent higher than last
years’ tax realisation, and 10 per cent higher than the Budget Estimates for 1985-86.
Direct Taxes will be 15 per cent higher than the Budget Estimates and Income-tax
Collections are expected to be as much as 36 per cent higher. This order of increase
in Direct Tax collections is unprecedented. The Centre’s share of taxes will increase
by 19 per cent over 1984-85 and that of States by 30 per cent. Another heartening
feature of fiscal developments is the sharp increase in Small Savings collections.
These will be 23 per cent higher than the Budget Estimates and 32 per cent more than
the previous year.
 45. As regards other receipts, non-tax revenue will be 2 per cent higher and
capital receipts including market borrowings, external assistance and small savings
will show an overall increase of 8 per cent.
 46. Taking advantage of buoyancy in tax revenues and satisfactory behaviour
of other economic indicators, including the high level of food stocks, the Government
decided to step up the Central Plan by Rs.1594 crores. The Revised Estimate for the
Central Plan is Rs.20,094 crores as against Budget Estimates of Rs.18,500 crores.
 9

Budgetary support for the Central Plan has been stepped up by Rs.1484 crores or by
13 per cent. In the additional allocations, particular care has been taken to provide
adequately for the infrastructure sectors like railways, steel and aluminium on the one
hand and anti-poverty programmes on the other.
 47. Several States continued to face problems of resources in the first half of
the current year. A number of steps were taken to help them in overcoming these
problems. I shall refer to them a little later.
 48. Coming to non-Plan expenditure, additional provisions amounting to
Rs.440 crores were made for interim relief, liberalised ad hoc bonus, pensionary
benefits, and additional dearness allowance sanctioned to Government employees in
the current year.
 49. Defence expenditure is placed at Rs.7862 crores as against Budget Estimate
of Rs.7686 crores. Interest payments are estimated at Rs.7400 crores, which is about
5 per cent higher than the Budged Estimate of Rs.7075 crores.
 50. There was, however, substantial increase during the year on account of
food and fertiliser subsidies. The Revised Estimates for these subsidies are Rs.1650
crores and Rs.2050 crores, representing an increase of 50 per cent and 14 per cent
respectively, over the Budget Estimates. Altogether, subsidies will be 24 per cent
higher than the Budget Estimates.
 51. The Revised Estimates for total receipts are Rs.46,01 crores as against the
Revised Estimates of expenditure of Rs.50,507 crores, leaving a deficit of Rs.4,490
crores. The Budget deficit is thus expected to be higher than the Budget Estimates.
However, despite this, the rate of growth of money supply in the economy has been
lower than in the previous year. The deficit has been absorbed by the economy without
unduly aggravating the overall liquidity position.
 52. In framing next year’s Budget Estimates, my first priority has been to
provide adequately for the Plan. As the House is aware, the Seventh Plan envisages a
total public sector outlay of Rs.1,80,000 crores of which Rs.95,534 crores has been
earmarked for the Central Plan at 1984-85 prices. To finance this order of Central
Plan, as pointed out in the document on Long Term Fiscal Policy, an outlay of about
Rs.18,000 crores at 1984-85 prices was required for 1986-87. At present prices, this is
roughly equivalent to Rs.20,000 crores.
 53. The annual Plan discussions conducted by the Planning Commission with
the Ministries, however, revealed that a much higher order of Plan outlay is required
for 1986-87, in order to maintain the momentum of investment in the core public
sector, and accelerate the implementation of and-poverty programmes. It has, therefore,
been decided to allocate Rs.22,300 crores for next year’s Plan. This constitutes a
massive increase of Rs.3,800 crores or 20.5 per cent over the Budget Estimates for
1985-86. Although this is by no means sufficient to fulfil all our needs, I believe that
 10

this order of increase will enable us to meet our urgent requirements. Taking the first
two years together, we would have provided over 40 per cent of the Seventh Plan
outlay in real terms at 1984-85 prices. This is substantially better than in the first two
years of the Sixth Plan.
 54. I am also happy to inform the House that the total Plan outlay of States,
for 1986-87 has been fixed at Rs.15,880 crores, representing an increase of 21 per
cent over the current year. For the Union Territories, the Plan outlay has been fixed at
Rs.872 crores compared with current year’s level of Rs.640 crores. It is also a matter
of satisfaction to me that the Centre provided substantial additional resources to States
in the current year which has strengthened the financial position of States.
 55. Compared with 1984-85, as I mentioned earlier, the States’ share of Central
taxes has gone up by 30 per cent. This reflects the sharp increase that has taken place
in revenue collections as also the increase in the share of States as a result of the
recommendations of the Finance Commission. I am glad that Centre’s efforts to improve
tax collections have also been of substantial benefit to States. There has been a steep
increase in other forms of transfer of resources as well. The States’ share in small
savings has registered an increase of 50 per cent and the Centre’s Plan assistance to
States has increased by 38 per cent. In addition, the Centre has provided Rs.722 crores
as assistance to States for drought and flood relief. A medium-term loan of Rs.1628
crores was also provided to the States in order to clear their overdrafts with the Reserve
Bank of India. I had made it clear that the Overdraft Regulation Scheme would have
to be strictly adhered to in all circumstances and I am glad that the States have
conformed to it. A problem that has bedevilled the fiscal picture for more than a
decade has thus been solved. I should make it clear that this problem will not be
allowed to recur.
 56. Taken together, there has been a massive increase of as much as Rs.7542
crores or 51 per cent in Centre’s transfers to States and Union Territories inclusive of
assistance for Central and Centrally sponsored schemes in the current year as compared
with 1984-85. In 1986-87 the budget estimates for total transfers to States on various
counts is estimated at Rs.20708 crores which is 15.4 per cent more than the budget
estimates for 1985-86.
 57. Let me now deal with some of the important sectors in which the Annual
Plan for 1986-87 will provide a major thrust. First and foremost, we propose to provide
a quantum jump in the allocations for poverty alleviation programmes. The outlay for
Department of Rural Development for 1986-87 has been fixed at Rs.1851 crores
compared to an approved outlay of Rs.1239 crores for 1985-86 - an increase of nearly
50 per cent. Hon’ble Members will recall that during the current year, Government
had announced schemes for construction of low cost rural houses for Scheduled Castes/
Scheduled Tribes and bonded labour, distribution of food grains at a concessional
price to the people in the Integrated Tribal Development Projects, extended coverage
 11

under nutrition programme for young children, pregnant women and nursing mothers
and expansion of the coverage of the Rural Landless Employment Guarantee
Programme and the National Rural Employment Programme by allocation of additional
food grains. It is proposed to continue with these programmes during the next year
also. An offtake of about 2 million tonnes of food grains is expected under these
programmes in 1986-87. These programmes are designed to fulfil a commitment made
by our Prime Minister Shri Rajiv Gandhi.
 58. Consistent with this Government’s commitment towards the alleviation of
rural poverty, greater emphasis has been laid on programmes which are of direct
benefit to the weaker sections of the society, especially the Scheduled Castes and
Schedules Tribes. The allocations and targets for some of the anti-poverty programmes
in 1986-87 are:-
 (1) National Rural Employment Programme will generate employment of over
 300 million man-days in 1986-87 as compared to 253 million man-days in
 the current year. The Centre’s outlay for this programme has been stepped
 up from Rs.230 crores in 1985-86 to Rs.443 crores next year - an increase
 of 93 per cent.
 (2) The Rural Landless Employment Guarantee Programme will generate
 employment of 264 million man-days next year as compared to 209 million
 man-days in the current year. The Central outlay for this Programme for
 1986-87 is Rs.633 crores which is 58 per cent higher than the current
 year’s budget estimate of Rs.400 crores.
 (3) The Centre’s allocation for Integrated Rural Development and related
 beneficiary oriented programmes is Rs.428 crores in 1986-87 as against
 Rs.283 crores in the budget estimates in the current year - an increase of
 51 per cent. In the first nine months of the current year 15.3 lakh families
 were assisted under the Integrated Rural Development Programme of which
 6.3 lakh families belonged to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes. In the
 Seventh Plan, the Integrated Rural Development Programme is expected
 to assist nearly 20 million families.
 (4) The outlay for housing schemes for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes
 and bonded labour is being enhanced from Rs.100 crores to Rs.125 crores.
 In 1985-86 projects worth Rs.146 crores involving construction of 1.5
 lakh houses have been approved. This important programme will receive
 a further boost.
 59. The rural water supply continues to be part of the Minimum Needs
Programme as well as Revised 20-Point Programme. At the beginning of the Sixth
Plan there were 2.31 lakh problem villages out of which 1.92 lakh were provided with
at least one safe source of potable water during the Sixth Plan period. In the Seventh
 12

Plan, priority will be given to provide drinking water to the remaining 39,000 problem
villages. It is expected that these villages will be covered by 1987-88. A provision of
Rs.317 crores has been made for this purpose in 1986-87.
 60. Agriculture and allied sectors enjoy a natural priority in all our development
efforts. The total Central outlay for the concerned Departments has been stepped up
from Rs.2207 crores in the current year to Rs.2838 crores in 1986-87 -an increase of
29 per cent. This includes the outlay on the programmes of rural development, details
of which I have just mentioned. As the Hon’ble Members know, the, Central outlay of
Rs.2838 crores will be in addition to the allocations made by the States for these
sectors in their own Plans.
 61. The Fertilizer Plants at Hazira and Thal Vaishet have commenced
production in the current year and will augment the production of nitrogenous fertilizers
considerably. Production of fertilizers in 1986-87 is expected to go up to 6.9 million
tonnes, which is an increase of 21 per cent over die current year. The provisions for
Aonla Project of IIFC0 and Vijaipur Project of National Fertilizers Limited - the other
major Gas based fertiliser projects - next year are Rs.205 crores and Rs.180 crores
respectively.
 62. A major thrust in the Seventh Plan is development of Human Resources.
This includes education, sports, youth affairs, health, family welfare, women’s welfare,
environment, art culture and broadcasting. I propose to enhance the outlays for
programmes in this sector from the current year’s level of Rs.1,236 crores to Rs.1,733
crores for 1986-87 -an increase of over 40 per cent.
 63. Education, the Hon’ble Members will agree, is the main instrument of
change. Accordingly, I propose to increase the outlay on Education from Rs.221 crores
in the current year to Rs.352 crores for 1986-87. This implies an increase of over 59
per cent.
 64. In the field of Education mention may be made of two schemes. It has
been decided to set up Model Schools in every district of the country to provide
education of high quality and excellence. I propose to provide Rs.25 crores in 1986-
87 for this scheme. For providing equal opportunities to the students in the remote and
backward areas in the field of higher education, a National Open University has been
set up for which I have provided Rs.7.5 crores for 1986-87.
 65. Radio and television are powerful vehicles for spread of information and
education. Successful implementation of new concepts and special schemes like
dissemination of knowledge in remote areas through Open University are also dependent
on the spread of broadcasting. With a view to enlarging the broadcasting infrastructure,
I propose to step up the outlay for the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting in the
current year from Rs.110 crores to Rs.242 crores - an increase of 120 per cent.
 13

 66. The New Education Policy’ will be presented by the Minister of Human
Resource Development during this Session of Parliament. I believe, the Policy will
give the highest priority to universalisation of primary education and to spread of
adult literacy in 15-35 age-group within the shortest possible time. Stress is also being
laid in the new policy on consolidation of secondary education and on launching a
large programme of employment-oriented vocational education. Besides, scientific
research and training of technical manpower will receive high priority. The Government
is committed to implement the education policy as approved by Parliament.
 67. We have adopted the goal of ‘Wealth for All” by the year 2000 A.D. This
is sought to be achieved mainly by expansion of primary health care programmes,
which as Hon’ble Members know, form part of the State Plans. I propose to provide
Rs.200 crores for programmes of the Department of Health during next year, of which
Rs.123 crores will be on programmes for control of communicable diseases. For Family
Welfare programmes I propose to provide Rs.530 crores for 1986-87.
 68. Art forms and cultural heritage foster national integration as well as national
development. I, therefore, propose to increase the outlay of the Department of Arts
and Culture from Rs.19 crores for this year to Rs.59 crores for 1986-87 - an increase
of more than 200 per cent. A new scheme is being launched for setting up zonal
cultural centres to highlight the cultural kinships that exist among the States and
people, as part of the composite Indian culture.
 69. The Government is deeply concerned about the problems of pollution. A
major scheme - the Ganga Action Plan - has been launched during the current year for
prevention of pollution of river Ganga. This is an inter-disciplinary programme being
implemented by the Central Ganga Authority. The proposed outlay for this scheme for
1986-87 is Rs.52 crores as compared to the current years level of Rs.10 crores. -The
higher provision will cover a large number of action plan schemes covering sewage
treatment to be implemented during 1986-87.
 70. The Government has set up the National Wastelands Development Board
with the objective of bringing wastelands under fuel wood and fodder cultivation. I
propose an outlay of Rs.15 crores for this programme for 198687. This will be in
addition to the provision of Rs.20 crores made for social forestry including rural fuel
wood plantation.
 71. A necessary feature of development process is the creation of needed
infrastructure facilities in sectors like Coal, Power, Railways, Petroleum and Surface
Transport which constitute the core of the public sector. In the Seventh Plan, the
outlay on infrastructure accounts for Rs.45,649 crores out of the total Central sector
outlay of Rs.95,534 crores, i.e. nearly 48 per cent. I am proposing an outlay of Rs.10,805
crores for 1986-87 as against Rs.8,751 crores in the current year - an increase of 23
per cent - for Departments of Coal, Power, Petroleum & Natural Gas, Railways and
 14

Surface Transport taken together. This accounts for 48 per cent of the total Central
sector Plan outlay for 1986-87.
 72. The outlay of the Department of Power is being stepped up from Rs.2,090
crores in the current year to Rs.2,575 crores in 1986-87. During the current year, the
capacity for power generation in the country is expected to be augmented by more
than 4,000 MW against the Seventh Plan target of 22,245 MW. Of the additional
capacity likely to be created in the current year, 865 MW will be from the Central
Sector projects. In 1986-87, the installed capacity is expected to further increase by
about 4,000 MW. Thus, the first two years would account for 36 per cent of the Plan
target.
 73. The performance of power stations owned by National Thermal Power
Corporation, a Central public sector undertaking, is a matter of satisfaction. In the
first ten months of the current year, these power stations attained a Plant Load Factor
of 67.9 per cent against the national average of 5 1.3 per cent.
 74. A notable achievement in the current year is the attainment of criticality
by Stage H of Kalpakkarn Atomic Power Station of 235 MW on August 12, 1985. The
commissioning of this plant marks the complete indigenisation of the technology for
Natural Uranium Heavy Water Reactor. The year also witnessed the commissioning of
one of the largest research reactors in the world - the 100 MW Dhruva - at the Bliablia
Atomic Research Centre. It is also a matter of great pride for us that with the Fast
Breeder Test Reactor at Kalpakkam attaining criticality, we have joined the select
group of countries which have made a major breakthrough in the Fast Breeder
Technology.
 75. An important project approved during the year in the power sector is the
Mejia Thermal Power Station of DVC. The project - located in Bankura District of
West Bengal - envisages creation of 630 MW capacity at an estimated cost of Rs.566
crores. It is proposed to set up three power plants, one each at Kawas (Gujarat), Anta
(Rajasthan) and Auraiya (Uttar Pradesh) based on Natural Gas, which together would
create additional capacity of 1,500 MW. An outlay of Rs.100 crores is proposed for
these three projects during 1986-87.
 76. Government have decided to set up a Power Finance Corporation. The
Corporation will augment resources for financing of the power projects, including
renovation and modernisation schemes. A provision of Rs.100 crores has been made
for renovation and modernisation in the Annual Plan for 1986-87, out of which Rs.70
crores will be provided for the proposed Corporation.
 77. An allocation of Rs.3,300 crores has been made for the Ministry of
Petroleum & Natural Gas for 1986-87. The production target for crude oil for the next
year has been set at 30.21 million tonnes. A sizeable increase in despatches of natural
gas is also anticipated. In 1986-87, the despatches are expected to be Rs.4,677 million
cubic metres which will be 28 per cent more than in the current year.
 15

 78. In the Indian context, Coal continues to be the most important primary
source of energy. Keeping in view the increasing demand for Coal and the long lead
time associated with development of coal mines, I am increasing the outlay for the
Department of Coal from Rs.1,102 crores in the current year to Rs.1,350 crores in
1986-87 - an increase of nearly 22.5 per cent. The target for production of Coal for
1986-87 has been fixed at 166.80 million tonnes which is 12.30 million tonnes higher
than the anticipated production during the current year.
 79. Despite impressive growth in the Transport sector, the capacity of the
entire transportation system continues to fall short of demand. There is also an
immediate need for replacement of the overaged and obsolete assets. Keeping this in
view, a total provision of Rs.3,875 crores has been made for the Ministry of Transport
for 1986-87, inclusive of Rs.2,650 crores for the Railways, separately provided in the
Railway Budget Railways’ freight traffic target for the next year has been fixed at 294
million tonnes - an increase of 17 million tonnes over the target for the current year.
The year also witnessed a remarkable improvement in the utilisation of assets and
financial performance by Railways.
 80. For 1986-87, I am proposing an outlay of Rs.1,350 crores for the
Department of Steel which includes Rs.700 crores for the Visakhapatnam Steel Plant.
Hon’ble Members will be glad to know that SAIL which had incurred a loss of
Rs.214.61 crores in 1983-84 has turned the corner. In 1984-85 the Company earned a
nominal profit of Rs.4.24 crores. In the current year, the profits are expected to be
over Rs.100 crores.
 81. The outlay for Department of Atomic Energy has been raised from Rs.495
crores to Rs.550 crores and for Department of Space from Rs.165 crores to Rs.217
crores.
 82. The proposed outlay for the Department of Telecommunications for 1986-
87 is Rs.915 crores. With a view to improving the operational efficiency of the
Telecommunication network, the Government have decided to set up a public sector
corporation to manage and operate the telephone services of the metropolitan cities of
Bombay and Delhi. This Corporation will also raise funds through the issue of bonds.
 83. A scheme for providing self-employment to educated unemployed was
announced by the late Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, on August 15, 1983.
For 1986-87 a provision of Rs.103 crores has been made for this scheme compared to
Rs.65 crores in the current year - a step up of 58 per cent. For the Khadi and Village
Industries Commission, I am providing Rs.100 crores for 1986-87. In the Seventh
Plan, employment coverage in the Khadi and Village Industries sector is expected to
increase from 37 lakh persons to 50 lakh persons.
 84. Tourism promotes understanding and national integration. Tourism is also
an important source of earning foreign exchange for the country. The Seventh Plan
 16

outlay on tourism at Rs.139 crores is 93 per cent higher than the outlay for the Sixth
Plan. For 1986-87 an outlay of Rs.26 crores is proposed. With a view to encouraging
tourism, further steps are being taken for improving the tourist infrastructure.
 85. The Hon’ble Members will be glad to know that with the priorities assigned
in the annual Plan 1986-87, implementation of the 20-Point Programme will gain
further momentum. Compared to Rs.4,900 crores in the current year, the outlay for
this programme in the Central Plan for 1986-87 will be Rs.5,998 crores - an increase
of more than thousand crores.
 86. Coming to non-Plan expenditure, I have provided Rs.8728 crores for
Defence compared to Rs.7,862 crores in the current year. The House will agree with
me that in view of the pressure on our borders, there cannot be any compromise with
our security.
 87. Reflecting the increase in market borrowings and small savings
mobilisation for development, interest payments will also increase to Rs.8,750 crores
against Rs.7,400 crores in the current year. I am also making a provision of Rs.1,750
crores for food subsidy and Rs.1,950 crores for fertilizer subsidy and the total of the
two is the same as in the Revised Estimates for the current year. Other non-Plan
expenditure has been kept to the minimum. This includes a lump sum provision of
Rs.300 crores for additional dearness allowance to Government employees.
 88. On the receipts side, I have assumed a 17 per cent growth in tax revenues
over current year’s Budget Estimates. In the estimates for non-tax receipts, I have
taken note of the repayment next year of the instalments of Compulsory Deposit
deferred during the current year as well as those falling due next year.
 89. Under capital receipts, only a modest increase of 4 per cent has been
assumed under market borrowings over the current year. Small savings collections,
however, are expected to yield 10 percent more than current year’s Revised Estimates
and 36 per cent higher than the current year’s Budget Estimates.
 90. The total receipts next year are estimated at Rs.48,767 crores and the total
expenditure at Rs.52,862 crores leaving a gap of Rs.4,095 crores at the existing levels
of taxation.
 91. I shall now turn to my taxation proposals.


