 SPEECH OF SHRI R. VENKATARAMAN MINISTER OF FINANCE,
 INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1980-81 (FINAL)


Sir,
 I rise to present the regular Budget for the year 1980-81.
 2. Presenting the interim Budget in March this year I gave an account of the
poor shape of our national economy and the magnitude of the task facing the nation.
The Economic Survey presented to the House last week confirms the brief review
made by me in March. As it gives a detailed account of the present condition of the
Indian economy and its problems and prospects, I shall content myself with highlighting
only a few aspects in order to give the House an idea of the gravity of the economic
problems faced by this Government, the action it has taken so far to solve them and
the need for other measures some of which I. shall outline in the course of this speech.
 3. The most important and disconcerting fact about the Indian economy is
that the gross national product declined in 1979-80 by about 3 per cent. A fall in
agricultural production of about 10 per cent and a reduction of about one per cent in
industrial production were responsible for this outcome. The set-back in agriculture
was partly on account of the severe drought which affected large parts of the country.
The decline in industrial production was mainly the result of a serious deterioration in
the infrastructure.
 4. The performance of power, coal and railway sectors was one of the most
serious deficiencies m the economic scene. No doubt the drought was responsible for
a decline of 2.2 per cent in hydel production but what stands out is the inability to
meet increased demand through increased thermal generation despite substantial
additions made to generating capacity in the past three years. Inadequate supply of
coal and its poor quality, poor maintenance, equipment damage resulting in increasing
planned and unplanned outages and poor management were responsible for the decline
in the percentage of thermal capacity utilisation to as low as 45 per cent.
 5. In coal again it was the same story. Despite massive investments the
production of coal and lignite in 1979-80 was just 106 million tonnes, marginally
better than the level reached four years ago. The poor performance of DVC and
the failure to maintain law and order in the coal mining areas of Bihar and Bengal
contributed to the set-back in coal production. At the same time coal could not be
transported to thermal stations in adequate quantities because of difficulties in
railway movement.
 6. In 1979-80 the revenue earning traffic of the Railways in terms of tonnes
 1

originating declined by 3.3 per cent from the level reached in 1978-79. The performance
of the Railways in terms of tonnes originating of revenue earning traffic has been
declining continuously since the peak reached in 1976-77. The deficiencies in the
three sectors, power, coal and railways, reinforced me another and inflicted severe
damage on the national economy.
 7. With the serious deficiencies in infrastructure it was not surprising that
there was a fall in the production of major commodities like steel, cement, non-electrical
machinery, aluminium and other non-ferrous metals and cotton textiles. Sugar
production also fell by 28 per cent. There was a decline in capacity utilisation in
industry in general.
 8. In a situation in which aggregate supply dropped sharply, there was a
steep rise in prices. In the fiscal year 1979-80 prices rose by 20 per cent. In some
commodities like sugar, gur, khandsari, oilseeds and edible oils the rise was particularly
steep. There was also a persistent upward trend in a wide range of manufactures and
intermediates owing to the low level of production. The direct and indirect effects of
the increases in the prices of crude oil and oil products also contributed to the
inflationary pressures in the economy as also the long delayed, adjustments in
administered prices of commodities like coal and steel. This naturally gave rise to
speculative expectations and the liquidity in the system due to large expansion of
money supply in the previous years aggravated the price situation.
 9. The other area in which there was a deterioration following from all these
factors was the balance of payments. It is true that our overall foreign exchange reserves
declined by only Rs.56 crores in 1979-80 but the trend in the various forces operating
m the balance of payments has been reversed perceptibly. Export growth in value
terms has only been 8 per cent or so which means there was hardly any growth in
terms of volume as world inflation has proceeded at about 10 per cent in 1979-80. On
the other hand imports have increased by about 25 per cent principally on account of
increased oil bill because of steep rise in the prices of oil and oil products and the
consequential impact on other imports such as fertilizer. The result is that the trade
gap in 1979-80 was Rs.2232 crores, double the size of the trade deficit in 1978-79.
This has led to a deficit on the current account. The rate of growth of remittances
which has in the recent past turned the trade deficit into a surplus on current account
also decelerated in 1979-80.
 10. Such a dismal economic situation was to a large extent the result of the
policies - or should I say lack of policies - of the previous Government. For instance,
vacillations in sugar policy contributed to a fall in the area under sugarcane, decline
in sugar production and the frittering away of large stocks of sugar carried over from
previous seasons through releases which could not be sustained over a period. Had
they pursued a more responsible policy on sugar, we would not have been in the
unenviable position of having to import sugar for domestic consumption.
 2

 11. In infrastructure the lack of coordinated policy in the three sectors of
coal, transport and power was responsible for their unsatisfactory performance. The
large Budget deficit of Rs.2700 crores in an economy flush with liquidity and a policy
of sweeping taxation m articles of common consumption in a situation of declining
production were responsible for the spurt in prices. Finally, the lack of adequate
emphasis on export promotion was partially responsible for the reversal of the trend
in our balance of payments.
 12. What is important now is to devise ways and means to arrest the
deterioration and set the economy on the path of stability and growth. The fact that we
have a Government which enjoys the confidence of the people and is decisive should
make a qualitative difference; as also the fact that there will be much greater cooperation
between the Centre and the States, now that our party has been so enthusiastically
returned in the State elections. At the end of May, 1980, we still have food stocks of
about 18 million tonnes owing to our earlier foresight. Foreign exchange reserves
stood at Rs.4890 crores as on May 30, 1980. These elements of strength will be
effectively utilised to improve the situation. But the House should realise that the
magnitude and complexity of the. problems we have inherited do not admit of quick
and easy solutions. However, the problems are so urgent that we shall tackle them
with determination and with the cooperation of all sections of our people.
 13. Since it came to power this Government has taken a number of steps to
correct the deficiencies in the economic system. Since restoration of infrastructure
brooked no delay Government constituted a Cabinet Committee on infrastructure under
my Chairmanship to monitor the situation continuously. As power shortages have
been an impediment to the growth of production the Committee has devoted a good
deal of attention to rectifying the power situation. The Committee wanted to ensure
that thermal generation did not suffer for lack of coal and, therefore, decided to make
more wagons available for loading coal to thermal stations. As a result the number of
wagons loaded daily with coal for thermal stations has gone up from 2900 in January
to 3200 in May, 1980.
 14. Coastal shipping has been revived to supplement movement of coal by
rail and is expected to achieve progressively a target of one lakh tonnes per month to
meet the needs of western and southern regions.
 15. Due to a number of steps taken coal production increased by 9.4 lakh
tonnes in April, and 10.4 lakh tonnes in May, 1980 as compared with April and
May, 1979.
 16. There has been a dramatic improvement in the port situation. The number
of ships waiting for a berth in Bombay, Calcutta and Madras has come down sharply
by May, 1980. A good indicator of the improvement in port conditions is the removal
of the congestion surcharge for major ports including Bombay and Calcutta from
April 1980.
 3

 17. As the rainfall during the period October, 1979 to May, 1980 was also
deficient causing drought conditions to continue in many States affecting 220 million
population, the present Government, immediately after assuming office, mounted relief
operations on a massive scale. Central teams were deputed to these and other States
and an allocation of Rs.150 crores was made for drought relief. More than 10 lakh
destitutes were provided free food. In addition, about 65 lakh persons were employed
daily under the special Food for Work Programme. Government has decided to continue
this programme till the end of September, 1980. The existing subsidy on agricultural
inputs, including nitrogenous fertilizers, to small and marginal farmers in the
mono-cropped drought affected areas where no rabi crops could be grown has also
been extended till the end of March,1981.
 18. A 12-point programme of drought management which provides the basic
framework and approach for fighting the drought has been evolved and recommended
to the States. A large number of rigs have been deployed for sinking wells and a
significant percentage of wells bored has proved successful. These steps are expected
to bring about permanent improvements in availability of drinking water in the drought
affected, States.
 19. The demand for petroleum products, particularly diesel, increased during
the last few months owing to a number of circumstances including the drought. The
problem was compounded by almost total cessation of supplies from January onwards
from the four refineries dependent on Assam crude which between them normally
produce around 350,000 tonnes of petroleum -products per month. The situation was
tackled with the utmost vigour. Firstly, the maximum quantities of diesel and kerosene
were imported between January and April, 1980, 6.2 lakh tonnes of kerosene and 1.1
million tonnes of diesel oil were imported as compared with 4. 7 lakh tonnes and 4.8
lakh tonnes respectively in January-April 1979. Secondly, the movement of these
commodities was speeded pp by all available means. The result has been an increase
in the level of supplies amounting to 10 per cent compared with the corresponding
months in 1979 and avoidance of a possible adverse effect on rabi production due to
a diesel shortage.
 20. With regard to prices Government has taken a number of important steps.
The coverage of the public distribution system has been widened. With regard to
edible oils not only has Government undertaken adequate imports but it has also made
arrangements to see that a sizable portion of these imports go into direct consumption.
It is hoped that about 3 lakh tonnes of imported oil will go into direct consumption
through the public distribution system and cooperatives. In sugar, Government has
activated the disrupted dual pricing system.
 21. In keeping with our developmental thrust towards the poorest, the banks
have been asked to ensure that a significant proportion of the enlarged priority sector
credit will flow to the beneficiaries of the 20-Point Economic Programme, which is

 4

being revitalised. To further strengthen the linkage between block level development
activities and the bank’s credit programmes, the banks have been asked to open by the
end of the year, branches at all unbanked block headquarters.
 22. Honourable Members are aware of the critical role played by our exports
in our developmental effort. Therefore, the Government had, over the years,
endeavoured to provide all facilities and full encouragement to export promotion efforts.
The management of credit and investment finance for export promotion in an
increasingly competitive international market is, however, becoming more and more
complex. There is thus a need for a specialised institution which will become a focal
point for all aspects of export credit and which will devote concentrated attention to
the needs of the exporting community. Government has, accordingly, decided to set up
an Export-import Bank, to assist the financing of our international trade. We hope this
specialised institution will give the desired boost to our export promotion efforts.
 23. In the light of the problems currently facing the economy the tasks to be
accomplished are clear enough. As there is a great deal of inflationary potential in the
economy, the prime objective of our policy will be to achieve price stability. This will
have to be done through an increase in aggregate supply and a moderation of aggregate
demand. Therefore, we intend to continue our efforts to improve the working of the
infrastructure and to augment available facilities with investment wherever necessary.
Secondly, the accent will be on utilising existing capacity more effectively, without
slackening efforts to increase capacity, to augment supplies of vital commodities like
steel, cement, aluminium and fetilizers. This will simultaneously increase production
and employment, reduce the need for imports and benefit revenue.
 24. With regard to demand management, we shall have to pursue a policy of
linking bank credit expansion to productive and priority purposes and check the
diversion of funds to speculative ends. We will also have to pursue an interest rate
policy which will help in the abatement of inflationary pressures without hurting
productive activity. At the same time profiteers and hoarders intent on exploiting
current shortages for personal gain will have to be dealt with sternly. Smuggling will
have to be countered through Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of
Smuggling Activities Act and other means.
 25. Since there is a great deal of liquidity in the system, there is an obvious
need to minimise the growth of money supply by keeping the budget deficit at a much
lower level than in 1979-80. This will require a fiscal policy which will reduce wasteful
and unnecessary expenditure, invest resources in increasing the economy’s production
potential and maximise the revenue potential of the existing tax system.
 26. In view of deterioration in our balance of payments we will have to
emphasise the promotion of exports to a far greater extent than has been done in the
past three years. At the same time, it is necessary to minimise the growth of imports
 5

through a much more energetic policy for augmenting domestic production in areas
like edible oils, steel, cement, fertilizers, oil and oil products.
 27. Government also intends to pursue policies which will encourage savings
and investment in the economy. Since 1971, a convertibility clause is being inserted in
agreements governing financial assistance to industrial units by public financial
institutions. It has been repeatedly represented by industry that the rigours of the
convertibility clause are inhibiting investment. Government has carefully considered
the matter and has decided that the policy guidelines for convertibility clause be
modified on the following lines:
 (a) The mandatory insertion of convertibility clause will in future apply to
financial assistance exceeding Rs.1 crore instead of Rs.50 lakhs prescribed at present.
 (b) The financial institutions should hereafter exercise the conversion option
in such a way that they do not acquire more than 40 per cent of the share capital of an
existing concern. However, in case of persistent default in repayment of loans or
mismanagement of an assisted company or continuous closure of an industrial unit of
a company producing goods and services essential to the community, the financial
institutions might, with the concurrence of Government, exercise their conversion
option in such a way that their shareholding can go up to 51 per cent or above.
 (c) Under the existing soft loan scheme for modernisation of jute, cotton
textiles, cement, sugar and certain engineering industries, no convertibility clause is
being inserted at present. This exemption is being extended to assistance for
modernisation in any industry and for rehabilitation of sick units.
 Government hopes these policy changes would remove the present inhibitions
and encourage fresh investment in and modernisation of industry.
THE PLAN AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR 1980-81
 28. In our preoccupation with the immediate problems of economic
management we should not lose sight of the need to build up the growth potential of
the economy over the medium term. If we do not do so, the short-term difficulties will
only grow further. The reconstituted Planning Commission will present the new
programmes and priorities when the Plan is formulated by the end of this year. But
meanwhile a Plan for the year 1980-81 has been formulated which will be dovetailed
into the Sixth Plan later. The broad objective of the Plan would be to achieve a higher
growth rate of 5 per cent per annum.
 29. The annual Plan for 1980-81 seeks to revive and restore the health of the
economy and accelerate the pace of growth and employment generation. Though the
priorities laid down by the earlier Government are not acceptable to us, we have
recognised that on-going projects should be fully provided for. Within the room for
manoeuvrability permitted by this consideration, we have effected changes in plan
 6

provisions or provided for new programmes so as to give a reorientation to the Plan in
the desired direction.
 30. The new Planning Commission has made a quick review of Plan
programmes and priorities. I am glad to announce that in the light of this review the
annual Plan outlay for 1980-81 of the Centre is being raised to Rs.7,340 crores, an
increase of Rs.767 crores over the outlay in the interim Budget; compared with last
year’s original outlay it is higher by 14.5 per cent. It will be financed by a budgetary
provision of Rs.5,322 crores and internal and other resources of public sector
undertakings of Rs.2,018 crores. A provision of Rs.3,094 crores has been made for
Central assistance to the outlay on States’ Plans, Union territories’ Plans and sub-plans
of hills and tribal areas, special component plans for the scheduled castes, schemes of
the North Eastern Council, Rural Electrification Corporation and natural calamities.
Inclusive of their own resources their Plan outlay will be Rs.7,253 crores as against an
outlay of Rs.6,099 crores in 1979-80. Altogether the total Plan outlay of the Centre,
States, Union territories, schemes of North Eastern Council, etc., would amount to
Rs.14,593 crores in 1980-81 as compared with Rs.12,511 crores in 1979-80 - a step up
of 16.8 per cent.
 31. It is this Government’s firm belief that economic growth could be
accelerated and its fruits widely shared only if employment opportunities in rural
areas are significantly augmented. Development will have no meaning to the vast
majority of our people if the poor in the rural areas are not able to secure a livelihood
through satisfactory productive work. As an integral part of the new Plan, we have
therefore, decided to launch a massive National Rural Employment Programme based
on a strategy which will seek to blend opportunities for self-help and optimum utilisation
of available local resources. Such a programme will go a long way towards revitalising
the rural economy and developing the infrastructure facilities so essential to the life of
the community.
 32. The Food for Work Programme initiated by us in 1977 has an important
part to play in this regard. But in the last two years this programme has displayed
certain cardinal weaknesses. In many cases, no attempts have been made to develop
an inventory of projects which will meet not only the local needs but also fit in with
the overall national priorities. There was also no firm indication of annual allocation
of foodgrains. The programme thus in effect continued on an ad hoc basis. No
arrangements were also made for financing the cash component of the works
programme undertaken by the State Governments with the help of foodgrains
allocated to them. The result was that they could not undertake works which could
have led to the creation of durable assets and the building up of productive potential
of the areas concerned.
 33. In the new National Rural Employment Programme, States will receive
assistance not only in the form of foodgrains but also cash assistance so as to enable
 7

them to undertake truly productive works of lasting benefit. The Budget estimates
which have been presented to the House provide Rs,340 crores in 1980-81 for this
programme. It is estimated that the programme, if properly implemented, could generate
850 to 900 million man days of additional employment. Some part of the provision for
this scheme would be specifically earmarked for’ high priority programmes like social
forestry, fuel plantation, rural community housing and water supply and nutrition.
Rs.10 crores have been provided for the Food for Nutrition Programme.
 34. The process of economic growth will be incomplete unless the benefits of
such growth reach the weakest sections of society. Therefore, the improvement of the
socio-economic conditions of the scheduled castes should be a major element of our
strategy of development. Comprehensive special component plans for the scheduled
castes will have to be drawn up with the objective of earmarking outlays in all relevant
sectors in proportion to the scheduled caste population in each State. Such outlays are
to be utilised for helping the scheduled caste families to acquire income generating
assets and relevant skills for the betterment of their living conditions. The Budget
breaks new ground by providing for a special central assistance of Rs.100 crores to
the States to act as a catalyst in the generation of more funds from other sources
including financial institutions. This will enable the authorities to provide as a package
all the inputs needed in an integrated programme of promotion of the socio-economic
condition of scheduled castes.
 35. A provision for Central assistance of Rs.70 crores has been made for the
development of tribal people and areas under the Tribal sub-plan. Additional pockets
with a population of 10,000 and having at least 50 per cent tribal concentration will be
identified, thus bringing nearly 75 per cent of the tribal population in eighteen States
and Union territories within the Tribal sub-plan. Greater emphasis will, be laid on
selected programmes which can benefit the tribal families.
 36. A provision of about Rs.50 crores has been made in the annual Plan for
1980- 81 for providing house sites for the landless and weaker sections as part of the
20-Point Economic Programme. The Rural Housing-cum-Hut Construction Scheme
for landless workers being operated under the revised Minimum Needs Programme
provides not only house sites but also assistance for the construction of huts. This
provision will be supplemented under the National Rural Employment Programme
which will cover community housing projects in rural areas. Nearly 8 lakh landless
families are expected to benefit under this scheme.
 37. Since India lives in its villages and nearly 70 per cent of its population
derives its livelihood from agriculture, the prosperity of the country depends upon the
modernisation of agriculture. The year 1979~80 is a grim reminder of the importance
of the performance of agriculture to the development of the Indian economy. The Plan
outlay on agriculture and rural development in the current year is being increased to
Rs.2,247 crores from Rs.1,811 crores in 1979- 80. This includes the provision in the

 8

Central Plan of Rs.158 crores for Small Farmers Development Agency, Drought Prone
Areas Programme, integrated Rural Development Programme, etc. ; Rs.32 crores for
better exploitation of inland and marine fish potential; Rs.54 crores for Operation
Flood II Project; Rs.59 crores for schemes of agricultural research and education
oriented towards improving agricultural productivity through better seeds, better
agronomic practices, better water management and better use of fertilizers and other
essential inputs; and Rs.10 crores to increase the production of oilseeds to reach a
target of 12 million tonnes.
 38. The current levels of international prices of oil and oil products have
highlighted the importance of other fuels. Forests can play an important part in providing
one such fuel. AS forests in India have suffered fast destruction by people in their
search for fuel, it is essential that people’s participation in the development of forests
is secured on an urgent basis. Social forestry in villages will besides meeting the
energy requirements of the people also provide additional employment. The raising of
fuel and fodder is proposed to be made a part of Minimum Needs Programme and it
will receive high priority in the National Rural Employment Programme.
 39. We have to press on with the task of increasing the area under Irrigation
to avoid fluctuations in production and to increase productivity. Therefore, the outlay
on major and medium irrigation projects including flood control for 1980- 81 is
being stepped up to Rs.1380 crores from Rs.1258 crores last year. The minor irrigation
programme would continue to receive special attention and an outlay of Rs.266
crores has been made for this purpose. This provision will be supplemented by large
financial support from the Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation.
The additional irrigation potential resulting from all this expenditure is expected to
be 2.5 million hectares.
 40. Clean and safe drinking water is essential for improvement of the quality
of life in rural areas. The Central Plan for 1980- 81 provides an outlay of Rs.100
crores as against Rs.80 crores in 1979- 80. Inclusive of the provisions in the States’
Plans, a total sum of Rs.294 crores will be available for this vital programme. It is
expected that by the end of the current year, 35,000 additional villages identified as
problem villages will be having protected water supply arrangements. A part of the
outlay has been earmarked for rigs to be supplied to States for boring wells in drought
affected areas. An additional sum of about Rs.40 crores has been allocated in the
current year to the drought affected States to take up new water supply schemes and
complete those already in hand.
 41. The khadi, village and small scale industries sector has the highest
employment potential next to agriculture. The outlay on this sector in the current
year will be Rs.150 crores and additional production during the year is estimated at
Rs.146 crores. The House will recall that the 20-Point Economic Programme has
particularly emphasised the development of the handloom sector in this context. In

 9

pursuance of this objective, we propose to set up a national level Handloom
Development Corporation for providing a package of marketing and developmental
assistance for the handloom industry. Provision has also been made for establishing
an institute of Handloom Technology in the North-Eastern region, which is well
known for its exquisite handloom products.
 42. The provision for the power sector has been raised by over 11 per cent
i.e., from 11p.2466 crores in 1979-80 to Rs.2745 crores. The work on the four Super
thermal power stations in the different regions of the country is being accelerated.
Total outlay oil the rural electrification programme will be Rs.285 crores in 1980- 81.
-The target in 1980- 81 is the energisation of 4 lakh pump-sets and the electrification
of 25,000 villages.
 43. Similarly, an outlay of Rs.473 crores is being provided in 1980-81 as
against Rs.364 crores last year for improving the production of coal (including lignite).
This includes a provision of Rs.92 crores for the Neyveli Lignite Corporation. The
bulk of this allocation is for the second mine project which will produce 4.5 million
tonnes per annum and the second thermal power station with a generating capacity of
630 MW. A production target of 113.5 million tonnes has been set for coal for the
current year as against the actual production of 106 million tonnes in 1979-80.
 44. In view of the impact on the balance of payments of the rising prices of
oil there can be no two opinions about the urgency of developing our own oil resources.
The Plan outlay for the petroleum sector for 1980-81 is Rs.837 crores, Rs.215 crores
more than the outlay last year. The Budget provides only Rs.99 crores out of this. This
outlay is for the completion of facilities for Phase III development of Bombay High
and advance action in. regard to Phase IV so as to build up a production capacity of
12 million tonnes per year. It also includes the expenditure required for the development
of the South Bassein Gas field and the gas pipeline to the new fertilizer projects.
On-shore exploratory drilling in the eastern region is to be intensified in view of the
region’s higher potential for hydro carbon discoveries.
 45. The Central Plan outlay m chemicals and fertilizers is being raised to
Rs.319 crores in 1980-81 to provide adequately for new gas-based fertilizer plants in
Maharashtra and Assam. In addition, a provision of Rs.20 crores has been made for
fertilizer projects in the cooperative sector.
 46. The Central Plan also provides in the current year an outlay of Rs.803
crores for the steel sector as against Rs.600 crores last year. The outlay includes a
provision of Rs.200 crores for raising the capacity of the Bokaro Steel Plant to four
million tonnes per annum and an outlay of Rs.190 crores for the Bhilai Steel Plant for
a similar expansion. Work on the Salem Project will proceed at the required pace with
an outlay of Rs.57 crores. A substantial beginning will be made on the new
Visakhapatnam Steel Plant with a provision of Rs.70 crores. The target of saleable
 10

steel in the current year has been fixed at 8.76 million tonnes as against the anticipated
production of 7.22 million tonnes in 1979-80.
 47. An outlay of Rs.130 crores is being made in 1980- 81 for the mines
sector. This includes a provision of Rs.10 crores for the new east coast aluminium
project, Rs.28 crores for the Malanjkhand Copper Project and Rs.19 crores for the
intensification of the activities of the Geological Survey of India and the Mineral
Exploration Corporation.
 48. A provision of Rs.64 crores has been made for BHEL for its continuing
schemes and for the production of large size turbo generators at Hardwar and the
expansion of boiler manufacturing capacity at Tiruchy.
 49. Since port congestion also has figured prominently as a constraint till
recently, a provision of Rs.102 crores is being made in 1980-81 for developing major
and minor ports. However, only a sum of Rs.60 crores has been provided in the
Budget as the rest of the expenditure is being met from internal resources of the Port
Trusts. Bombay, Madras and Cochin are being equipped to handle the anticipated
increase in container traffic. A beginning has been made on the integrated development
of Cochin Port.
 50. The Plan outlay for 1980- 81 for the Posts & Telegraphs Department is
Rs.415 crores. It is proposed to provide additional 1.75 lakh lines switching capacity
and 1.7 lakh direct exchange lines and other facilities. The number of post offices in
rural, backward and hilly areas is also proposed to be increased. The norms for providing
telegraph and telephone facilities in tribal areas have been further liberalised to cover
areas having a population of 2500 in a group of villages within a radius of 10 kms.
Provision has also been made for the expansion of manufacturing capacity for switching
equipment.
 51. Family Planning programme suffered a serious set back in the past three
years. A revitalisation of this programme must constitute an important element of the
new Five Year Plan, if an improvement of the living conditions of our people is our
goal. A provision of Rs.250 crores is being made in 1980-81 for health and family
welfare. Of this, Rs.140 crores will be for family welfare. The emphasis in the family
welfare programme will be on- educating the people about the desirability of a small
family and providing the necessary technical services on an adequate scale. An attempt
will also be made to provide improved health services in rural areas, eradicate
communicable diseases and provide health education.
 52. The development problems of a poor society of 650 million people are
bound to be stupendous. For a solution of these, within a reasonable time, it will be
necessary to harness the forces of science and technology. India is favourably placed
with regard to the development of science and technology in that she has a large pool
of scientific and technical man-power and a vast institutional infrastructure developed
 11

over the last thirty years. While our scientific institutions can help to advance the
frontiers of knowledge, it is science based technology which can help to raise production
and productivity. Therefore, an outlay of Rs.116 crores has been provided in the Central
Plan for 1980-81 for science and technology.
 53. I will now make a brief mention of a few changes in the non-Plan
expenditure. The provision for Defence expenditure is Rs.3600 crores, Rs.300 crores
more than the provision made in the interim Budget. The provision for export subsidy
has been increased from Rs.330 crores to Rs.355 crores, in view of the need for a
larger export effort.
 54. Loans to State Governments, as their share of small savings collections,
are being stepped up from Rs.650 crores in the interim Budget to Rs.715 crores, in
view of the anticipated improvement in these collections. Short term loans to State
Governments for agricultural inputs are also being increased by Rs.50 crores. Besides,
additional provision has also become necessary to meet unavoidable commitments
like additional dearness allowance to Central Government employees, purchase of
heavy water for atomic power plants, etc. However, the above increases in non-Plan
expenditure will be partially offset by reduction in fertilizer subsidy.
 55. The Constitution envisages provision of free legal aid by Government in
order to ensure that an opportunity for securing justice is not denied to any citizen
because of economic or other disabilities. The concept of legal aid has also been dealt
with by a Committee on Juridicare headed by Justice P.N. Bhagwati, whose Report
dated 31st August, 1977 has been laid before Parliament. Several States have been
attempting legal aid programmes. It is proposed to coordinate these schemes and also
initiate suitable schemes at the Centre after an examination of the various aspects. A
committee for guiding the legal aid schemes and implementing the same is being
constituted with a Supreme Court Judge as its Chairman. The Budget for 1980-81
makes a provision for this purpose.
 56. Taking into account the effect of the above and some other changes, the
total non-Plan expenditure is now estimated at Rs.13,051 crores as against Rs.12,822
crores in the interim Budget.
 57. As regards receipts in the current year, at existing levels of taxation
Corporation tax is estimated to yield Rs.11 crores more than what was reflected in the
interim Budget; this improvement is mainly based on the actual trends of collection in
1979-80. On the basis of latest available data on estimated levels of imports and
production during the current year, Customs duties and Union Excise duties are also
expected to yield Rs.40 crores and Rs.108 crores respectively more than anticipated in
the interim Budget. However, these increases will be more or less offset by the recent
decision of Government to withdraw customs and excise duties on fertilizers. Taking
into account States’ share of taxes, net tax revenue at existing rates of taxation is
estimated at Rs.8723 crores as against Rs.8725 crores in the interim Budget.
 12

 58. On the basis of the latest indications available, external assistance, net of
repayments, in 1980-81 is estimated at Rs.1252 crores showing an increase of Rs.56
crores over the figures included in the interim Budget. In addition we expect to avail
of a loan of Rs.540 crores from the Trust Fund of the International Monetary Fund in
1980-81 and the Budget assumes credit for this.
 59. There is a welcome increase in small savings collections. The estimate
for 1980-81 is now placed at Rs.1100 crores as against Rs.1000 crores in the interim
Budget. Of the increase of Rs.100 crores, Rs.65 crores will accrue to the States as
their share.
 60. It has been decided that a part of the investible resources of Life Insurance
Corporation, General Insurance Corporation, and Unit Trust of India should be lodged
with Government in Special deposit accounts to augment resources for financing the
Plan. Budget for 1980-81 takes a credit of Rs.100 crores on account of these deposits.
 61. When we are seeking to step up investment in public sector, it is necessary
to adopt an innovative approach to the problem of mobilising resources for sustaining
such investment. As Honourable Members know, private sector companies raise
resources in the form of deposits from the public. Government feels that there is no
reason why public sector companies with competent professional management should
not do so. Accordingly, we have decided to allow selected public sector units to
raise public deposits on the same lines as the companies in the private sector. When
this scheme makes headway, dependence of these public sector enterprises on
budgetary support will get reduced. But I have refrained from taking credit for such
relief at this stage.
 62. Taking into account other variations and also the effect of the changes in
the fare and freight rates of Railways and of changes in Posts and Telegraphs tariff, to
which I will refer a little later, the total receipts in 1980- 81 are estimated at Rs.19,827
crores as against Rs.18,980 crores in the interim Budget. Total expenditure is estimated
at Rs.21,467 crores. The deficit at existing rates of taxes will thus be Rs.1640 crores.
