 SPEECH OF SHRI NARAYAN DATT TIWARI MINISTER OF FINANCE
 INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1988-89
 PART A


Sir,
 I rise to present the Budget for the year 1988-89.
 2. The Economic Survey for 1987-88 was placed before the House a few
days ago and contains a detailed review of trends in the Indian economy over the past
year. Economic performance and management during the year have been dominated
by natural calamities of drought and floods. The drought this year has been one of the
worst in this century, with 21 out of 35 meteorological sub-divisions receiving deficient
or scanty rainfall during the monsoon months. In most of the Eastern states the problem
was not too little but, rather, too much rainfall, leading to devastating floods. What is
worse, this year of drought and floods followed three successive years of poor monsoon.
 3. Despite the very severe strains and distress, the economy has demonstrated
remarkable resilience. It has done so for two good reasons. First, sustained development
and diversification of our economy, over the years, has created a capacity to withstand
temporary shocks. Second, Government has responded with timely interventions across
a wide front to contain the economic and social costs of the drought.
 4. The buffer stock policy pursued by the Government enabled us to build
large food stocks, which stood at 23 million tonnes on 1st July, 1987. With the help of
these stocks, a massive and sustained effort was launched to ensure adequate supply
of foodgrains throughout the country, particularly in drought affected areas. Other
important Government programmes to combat the drought included massive expansion
of relief and employment generating works, strengthening of the public distribution
system, special efforts to compensate for shortages of drinking water, fodder and
power supply, action plans to grow contingency crops in the kharif season and to
boost rabi production, measures for livestock protection and large scale imports of
essential commodities such as edible oils and pulses. These supply measures were
buttressed by careful fiscal and monetary policies to make available adequate resources
for relief expenditures, without cutting back on the public investment programme.
 5. Thanks to these sustained efforts the overall indicators of economic
performance have been better than in any previous year of severe drought. Thus,
despite the decline in agricultural production, GNP growth in 1987-88 is expected to
be in the range of 1 to 2 per cent, in contrast to a decline of 4.7 per cent in 1979-80.
 1

Available data show that industrial production in April-November 1987 rose by 10.2
per cent over the corresponding period of the previous year. In contrast, in the drought
year 1979-80, there was an absolute decline of 1.7 per cent in industrial production.
The overall rate of inflation in the current financial year, as measured by the Wholesale
Price Index, stood at 9.8 per cent as on February 6, 1988 as compared with inflation
in excess of 21 per cent recorded in 1979-80. Price movements in respect of essential
commodities are being monitored closely at Central and State levels and I would like
to thank State Governments for setting up control rooms at the district level also. We
have to keep continuous vigilance on the price front at all levels.
 6. The strains imposed by the drought and floods have highlighted some of
the underlying strengths as well as problem areas of our economy. In the face of
successive monsoon failures, our agriculture has demonstrated its basic strength. We
are proud of our farmers. By their hard work and unflinching determination through
the years, they produced enough to enable us to build substantial food stocks. This
helped us to withstand the impact of the current drought without acute food scarcity
and widespread economic dislocation.
 7. Industrial production will show an increase of more than 8 per cent for
four successive years since 1984-85. The infrastructure has performed well. Generation
of thermal power has made up the deficiency in generation of hydel power and, overall,
there was a growth of 7.6 per cent in power generation in the first nine months of the
current year. Productivity in the Railways has shown significant improvement. Coal
production has increased by 10.2 per cent in April-December,1987. The improvement
shown by the public sector in these areas is a matter of considerable satisfaction, and
bears testimony to the successful implementation of policies initiated by this
Government. Our workers have worked hard to make this possible, and the nation is
grateful to them. Government attaches the highest importance to building a strong and
vibrant public sector.
 8. Exports have recorded strong growth over the last two years. After growing
by over 15 per cent in 1986-87, exports rose by nearly 25 per cent in the first nine
months of the current year as compared to the corresponding period of the previous
year. Over the same period, the growth of imports was less than 14 per cent. The trade
deficit has been declining over the past two years.
 9. However, we must not be complacent. As we look ahead, we must move
decisively to overcome some of the problems that have emerged on the economic
scene. The four successive years of poor monsoons have caused considerable hardship
in our rural areas, reduced agricultural output, and affected the momentum of growth.
We, therefore, have to give a major thrust to agriculture in the remaining years of the
Seventh Plan.
 10. We have done well in agriculture. But the drought and floods have
highlighted certain areas which require our urgent attention. The Prime Minister has
 2

directed that an Action Plan should be formulated quickly by the Planning Commission,
which would identify the areas where further measures can lead to early gains in
production. In 1987-88, an additional allocation of Rs.236 crores has been made for
completion of irrigation projects in drought affected States. In the coming year, Plan
outlays for Centre and States in respect of agriculture and irrigation are being increased
by 40 per cent. If necessary, the Government will make re-allocations within the
overall Plan outlay for 1988-89 and provide more resources for achieving agricultural
targets.
 11. We have seen rapid growth in industry, reflecting the success of
Government policies in stimulating investment and production, and promoting
technological upgradation. We must ensure that this momentum is maintained. Costs
and prices need to be reduced. Indian Industry must be made more competitive. Sickness
in industry has been a major problem. We have to take further steps to combat sickness.
We must also upgrade skills, train workers and improve management. Industrial
development must make the best use of our most abundant resource, namely, the skills
of our people. Rapid growth of industry is essential for generating employment
opportunities.
 12. Small, village and khadi industries have a special place in our economic
development. These industries make use of locally available resources and are
instrumental in creating job opportunities in smaller towns and rural areas where the
bulk of our people live. Speaking in this house, thirty five years ago, Pandit Jawahar
Lal Nehru had told the nation, and I quote,
 “I have no doubt that we cannot raise the people’s level of existence
 without the development of major industries in this country; in fact, I will
 go further and say that we cannot even remain a free country without
 them........... But we must always remember that the development of heavy
 industry does not by itself solve the problem of the millions in this country.
 We have to develop the village and cottage industry in a big way, at the
 same time making sure that in trying to develop industry, big and small,
 we do not forget the human factor.”
 This overall approach continues to guide us.
 13. Government has been taking several measures to increase revenue, improve
tax compliance and enforce economic laws. These have yielded dividends and growth
of revenue in the past three years has been quite satisfactory. The faster growth of
expenditure has, however, exerted substantial pressures on the fiscal situation. We
face unavoidable compulsions of higher expenditure, for example, on defence,
development, social services, relief programmes and food and fertilizer subsidies. As
a nation, we must deal earnestly with the problem of mounting expenditure.
 14. As anticipated, the balance of payments situation has been under strain
because of several factors. These include higher imports of edible oils and pulses,
 3

increase in imports of crude oil and petroleum products, increasing protectionist
tendencies abroad, and unfavourable climate for official development assistance. The
environment for developing countries has also been badly affected by upheavals in the
international economy, volatility of exchange rates, and slow growth of world trade.
In order to reduce the impact of these unfavourable developments, we took vigorous
measures to increase exports and reduce the growth of imports. These measures would
need to be further strengthened.
 15. India has followed a prudent policy in debt management and has avoided
problems of the kind faced by several other developing countries. We remain committed
to ensuring long-term viability in our balance of payments.
 16. The challenges before us are many and it is only through hard work, thrift
and sacrifice that we can build a self-reliant, strong and socialist economy. As a humble
political worker, I am conscious that while we have made tremendous progress, there
is a great deal that remains to be done to improve the condition of our people,
particularly in rural areas.
 17. Within the limitation imposed by our overall resource situation, I propose
to take a number of steps to benefit farmers, promote small and village industries,
provide relief to the poor, protect and create more jobs, and generate self employment
opportunities for our people. In addition to augmenting the anti-poverty programmes,
such as IRDP, NREP and RLEGP, Government has decided to initiate a number of
measures to increase the flow of agricultural credit, strengthen the institutional
framework, enhance social security to the weaker and vulnerable sections of the society,
particularly Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and promote better housing for
the rural poor. While some of these programmes call for additional outlays, it is proposed
to reorient and redirect several of the existing programmes and institutions to serve
our social objectives better.
 18. In working out the package of measures for agriculture, we have kept in
view the guidelines given by the Prime Minister when he addressed the kisans the
other day:
 ÞBÉEßÉÊKÉ BÉEÉä +ÉMÉãÉä nÉä iÉÉÒxÉ ºÉÉãÉÉå àÉå ABÉE VÉÉä®nÉ® xÉªÉÉ |ÉÉäiºÉÉcxÉ ÉÊnªÉÉ VÉÉA, ÉÊVÉºÉàÉå UÉä]ä +ÉÉè®
 ºÉÉÒàÉÉÆiÉ ÉÊBÉEºÉÉxÉÉå, £ÉÚÉÊàÉcÉÒxÉ àÉVÉnÚ®Éå +ÉÉè® OÉÉàÉÉÒhÉ nºiÉBÉEÉ®Éå {É® JÉÉºÉ vªÉÉxÉ ÉÊnªÉÉ VÉÉA* càÉÉ®ÉÒ ªÉc
 £ÉÉÒ BÉEÉäÉÊ¶É¶É cÉä ÉÊBÉE AäºÉÉÒ VÉÉä £ÉÉÒ ªÉÉäVÉxÉÉ näcÉiÉ BÉEä ÉÊ´ÉBÉEÉºÉ BÉEä ÉÊãÉA ¤ÉxÉä ´Éc nä¶É BÉEä c® cãÉBÉEä
 BÉEä ÉÊãÉA cÉÒ xÉcÉÒ ¤ÉÉÎãBÉE näcÉiÉ àÉå c® iÉ¤ÉBÉEä BÉEä ÉÊãÉA £ÉÉÒ ¤ÉxÉä* <ºÉºÉä {ÉÚ®ä ºÉàÉÉVÉ BÉEÉÒ iÉÉBÉEiÉ ¤ÉxÉäMÉÉÒ,
 {ÉÚ®ä ºÉàÉÉVÉ BÉEÉä <ºÉBÉEÉ ãÉÉ£É ÉÊàÉãÉäMÉÉ +ÉÉè® {ÉÚ®É ºÉàÉÉVÉ +ÉÉMÉä ¤ÉfÃäMÉÉ*Þ
 [In the next two-three years we must give a strong thrust to agriculture.
 Special attention must be given to small and marginal farmers, landless
 labourers and village artisans. It shall also be our endeavour that our
 schemes for rual development benefit not only all the regions of the country
 but also all the sections of the society. This will strengthen and benefit the
 entire community and help us march forward.]
 4

 19. The financial condition of our farming community has been affected by
the drought. A number of measures have already been taken such as reschedulement
of loans, conversion of short term loans into term loans and lowering of rate of interest
in some cases. As an important step forward, I am happy to inform the House that
today the Reserve Bank of India is issuing instructions to bring down the cost of
agricultural credit. The rate of interest on crop loans upto Rs.7,500 is being reduced
by one and half per cent to two and half per cent. The interest rate will, henceforth, be
reduced to 10 per cent for loans upto Rs.7,500 from the prevailing levels of 11.5 per
cent and 12.5 per cent. Similarly, for crop loans above Rs.7,500 and upto Rs.15,000,
interest rate will be reduced to 11.5 per cent from 12.5 per cent to 14 per cent. This
reduction in interest rates will benefit crores of agricultural borrowers from cooperative
sector, Regional Rural Banks and commercial banks, and provide much needed relief
to them.
 20. In order to increase the flow of credit at reduced cost, it has also been
decided that the target for direct finance to agriculture by public sector banks should
be raised to 17 per cent of their total outstanding advances by the end of 1988-89.
Together with added efforts by regional rural banks and cooperative banks, the target
for availability of direct credit by banks to agriculture will increase by over Rs.3,000
crores in 1988-89.
 21. In order to further reduce the cost of inputs, Government is asking the
fertilizer companies, in both public and private sectors, to give a discount of 7.5 per
cent over notified prices for coming Kharif and Rabi sowings. This will reduce the
price of a bag of urea by around eight rupees and eighty paise. The companies should
be able to absorb the cost of this discount through better inventory management. I am
sure our enterprising farmers will take advantage of this discount and increase
agricultural production.
 22. Timely use of pesticides and weedicides has an important role in preventing
crop damage and improving productivity on our farms. In order to lower their cost, I
will be announcing later in my speech, reduction in import duties on selected pesticides/
weedicides as well as intermediates. At the same time, selected pesticide items,
considered important for agriculture, will be allowed to be imported freely by designated
state and cooperative agencies. This will ensure that the existing manufacturers do not
indulge in monopolistic practices. This measure will help our farmers.
 23. In consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, NABARD, the State Bank
of India and the Commercial banks, I am happy to announce a new strategy on rural
credit designed to serve every village of the country. The commercial banks and the
Regional Rural banks together have over 40,000 branches in the rural and semi urban
areas of the country. The number of villages exceeds five lakhs and seventy six
thousand. Under the proposed dispensation, each bank branch in the country will have
a designated service area of about 15 to 25 villages, as required, in the neighbourhood
 5

of the branch. The branch will be primarily responsible for meeting the appropriate
credit needs of its service area. This country-wide arrangement, supervised by the
District Lead Bank Scheme already operational, and further supplemented by the rural
cooperatives, will go a long way to serve the credit needs of the village community.
 24. To help farmers affected by drought, we have given a number of reliefs
and concessions by way of rescheduling of loans, postponement of all recoveries, and
reduction in interest rates. It has been a long standing demand of farmers and the
cooperative movement that a separate National Agricultural Credit Relief Fund should
be established to provide relief on a systematic basis. I am happy to announce that it
has now been decided to set up such a Fund. The corpus of the Fund will be provided
by the Central and State Governments on an agreed basis. The criteria for releasing
money from the Fund will be worked out by the Reserve Bank of India.
 25. Before I turn to other matters, I would like to refer to a subject which has
been close to our hearts. I have a feeling that the cooperative credit system, which
played such a pioneering role in the early years of our Independence, has not grown
as fast as it could have. Cooperatives are the best instruments for reaching our farmers;
they are also a symbol of self-reliance at the village level. I believe that we must now
devote special attention to revitalising the entire cooperative sector. I would invite the
Hon’ble Members to give this matter their personal attention and also request them to
send me suggestions regarding the role that the Reserve Bank of India, NABARD and
the nationalised banking sector, should play in promoting the growth of the cooperative
movement. I shall also be writing to State Governments, who have a major responsibility
in this area.
 26. The programme of rural electrification has enabled countrywide utilisation
of ground water for irrigation with the help of electric pump sets. However, some of
the poorer farmers have often been unable to afford the one time cost of pump set
installation. A special programme to be called JALDHARA will be launched to assist
marginal farmers in drought prone areas. This scheme will provide them the benefits
of pump sets for irrigation on nominal rental / lease charges. It is proposed that during
1988-89 the benefits of this scheme will be provided to about fifty thousand farming
families.
 27. To improve the quality of life of rural families below the poverty line,
including Harijans and Adivasis families, I propose a massive programme to be called
KUTIRJYOTI for extending single point light connections to households of their
families. The programme will meet the one time cost of internal wiring and service
connection charges. In 1988-89, five lakh households are proposed to be covered by
this programme. The cost of both the JALDHARA and KUTIRJYOTI will be met
through a combination of grants and loans to the State Electricity Boards by the Rural
Electrification Corporation.
 6

 28. People living in hill areas have to bear the burden of higher transport
costs in the supply of Kerosene and LPG. Today, freight subsidy is given on Kerosene
to North Eastern States and Jammu & Kashmir. It has now been decided to extend this
concession to all hill areas. Similarly, it has been decided that LPG cylinders would be
supplied to the customers in all hill areas at the same price as for the customers in the
nearest point in the plains. This will also, to a large extent, help in conserving the
forest resources used for purposes of light and fuel.
 29. In his budget speech last year, the Prime Minister emphasized the high
priority of the housing sector and had announced the decision to set up a National
Housing Bank with an initial capital of Rs.100 crores. Necessary legislation has been
passed, and the Bank will become operational shortly. In order to give a special thrust
to rural housing, the Reserve Bank of India, along with some financial institutions,
will make a special additional contribution of Rs.100 crores to the National Housing
Bank. This entire additional amount will be used for promotion of rural housing in
several ways, including setting up of specialised rural housing savings and loan
institutions,if necessary.
 30. In this context, it is also proposed to extend the role of the Land
Development Banks to cover the field of housing finance for farmers. These banks
exist in most districts, have strong apex bodies and deal directly with the rural
population. They can also mobilise resources for housing finance. The State
Governments will be requested to carry out necessary legislative measures to permit
Land Development Banks to undertake housing finance.
 31. A new programme of housing for small and marginal farmers with monthly
income of upto Rs.700, is being launched by Housing and Urban Development
Corporation. Under this programme, HUDCO will provide assistance, upto specified
amounts, at low rate of 7 per cent interest repayable in 22 years for building or
improving a house. Assistance will also be given for improvement of old homes, for
example, change of roof from thatch to tile.
 32. A new scheme, called the “Village Abadi Environmental Improvement
Scheme” will be launched by HUDCO this year. Projects involving expenditure upto
Rs.2,000 per family in villages with population not exceeding 5,000, for improving
rural abadi infrastructure like drainage, sanitation etc., will be supported. The equity
base of HUDCO will be suitably strengthened to help finance these programmes.
 33. Commercial Banks have also been providing help for rural housing, both
directly as well as through HUDCO. With their vast branch network in rural areas,
their role should be further enhanced. Hon’ble Members will be happy to know that,
it has been decided that commercial banks will increase their lending for the housing
sector to an annual level of Rs.300 crores by the end of the Seventh Plan.
 34. There is great scope for using local low-cost materials in housing. Our
scientists and engineers have also developed considerable expertise in low-cost housing
 7

technology. It has been decided to set up a national network of Nirman or Nirmithi
Kendras which will provide easy access to low-cost housing materials and techniques.
It is proposed to set up one Kendra in each district. In the coming year, 100 Kendras
will be set up.
 35. Landless labourers, artisans and other very poor families in rural areas
face acute financial distress when their huts and belongings are destroyed by fire. I am
glad to inform the House that it is proposed to launch a new scheme to provide fire
insurance protection to them. The Government of India will bear the entire premium
cost. The scheme will be implemented by the General Insurance Coporation of India
and its four subsidiaries. The GIC will separately announce the details of the scheme.
 36. I also propose to take a major new initiative for extending the system of
social security to the weaker sections of our society. The Life Insurance Corporation
of India, which has done so much to spread insurance culture throughout the length
and breadth of our country, will be setting up a separate “Social Security Fund” with
a corpus of Rs.100 crores. Certain changes are being made in the Income tax payable
by the Life Insurance Corporation of India to make this possible. The Fund will be
used for financing life insurance schemes for weaker and vulnerable sections of the
population at subsidised rates. The House will agree with me that the creation of such
a fund will provide a solid foundation for extending insurance cover to the toiling
sections of our society, for example, landless labourers, handloom workers, rickshaw-
pullers, drivers etc. who work on daily wages or whose employment is casual. In
respect of these group insurance schemes, 50 per cent of the premium will be adjusted
from the newly created Social Security Fund, the balance 50 per cent of the premium
being payable by the beneficiaries concerned.
 37. Group insurance schemes will also be introduced for groups with regular
incomes like primary school teachers, cooperative milk producers, and workers in
shops and commercial establishments. Schemes will also be formulated for the benefit
of artisans, tailors, barbers, masons, carpenters and other similar groups.
 38. While IRDP extends benefits to the families of the poor, these families
face hardship in the event of sudden death of the head of the family. To give greater
security to the family, a group insurance scheme of the LIC is proposed to be introduced
to cover around 3 to 4 million families under IRDP assistance every year with effect
from 1.4.1988. The insurance cover will be Rs.3,000, with double benefit in case of
accidental death.
 39. I would now like to propose some measures specifically for the benefit of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Many State-level Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes Finance/Development Corporations are doing a good job in looking
after the special requirements of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. I now
propose setting up a National Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Finance and
Development Corporation. This corporation will play a catalytic role in developing
 8

schemes for employment generation and financing pilot programmes which can then
be taken up by the State level Corporations and other agencies active in this field. This
Corporation will also work with nationalised banks and NABARD in improving the
flow of financial assistance to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The objective
would be to innovate, experiment and promote rather than replicate the work of the
existing agencies. I am making a provision of Rs.50 crores in the next year’s budget
for this Corporation.
 40. Hon’ble Members will be happy to know that we propose to initiate a
project for one million wells under the National Rural Employment Programme and
Rural Landless Employment Guarantee Programme by raising the percentage of
allocation of funds for the exclusive benefit of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
from 10 per cent to 20 per cent. It is fitting that in the year of Fortieth Anniversary of
Independence, we initiate this massive programme of construction of wells which will
benefit millions of small and marginal farmers belonging to Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes.
 41. I would now like to announce some measures for promotion of employment
opportunities in the decentralised sector. The handloom sector provides employment
to about 10 million weavers and others. This important sector has been affected by
high prices of cotton and other yarns. I propose to increase the subsidy on Janata cloth
from Rs.2 per sq.metre to Rs.2.75 per sq. metre. The impact of this relief will be Rs.40
crores. Later, in my speech, I shall be announcing a package of measures which will
benefit the handloom sector by reducing the cost of certain types of yarns. At present,
a standard rebate of 10 per cent is being provided for Khadi. I propose to extend this
rebate to Kambals and Kambalis.
 42. It has been a long standing demand of the tiny and small industries that
there should be a separate apex bank for them. Hon’ble Members will be happy to
know that it has now been decided to establish a Small Industries Development Bank
of India. The new bank will be a subsidiary of the Industrial Development Bank of
India. The equity of the new bank will be Rs.250 crores, and it will have its own
separate Board of Directors, including representatives from the small scale sector.The
new Bank will also administer both the Small Industries Development Fund established
in May, 1986 and the National Equity Fund for providing equity support to projects in
tiny and small scale sector.
 43. New small scale units often experience problems and delays in securing
working capital finance. In order to overcome this difficulty, it has been decided that
requirements of working capital upto Rs.2.5 lakhs for new tiny and small scale units,
whose project cost does not exceed Rs.5 lakhs, will be provided through a single
window. Thus, both term loans and working capital will be made available by the
same bank or institution. The details of this scheme will be announced by Industrial
Development Bank of India shortly.
 9

 44. A healthy capital goods sector is a pre-requisite for self-reliance. Last
year, while presenting the Budget, the Prime Minister announced a package of measures
to revitalise the machine building industries. Later in my speech, I shall be announcing
certain measures which will carry this process further for revitalising industries such
as paper, cement, and textiles. These measures will help to stimulate demand, lower
costs and improve efficiency.
 45. The Capital market is an important source for mobilisation of savings for
industry and Government has taken several steps to strengthen it. Last year, the Prime
Minister announced the decision to set up a separate Board for the regulation and
development of the Stock Exchanges. Necessary legislation in this regard is under
preparation and the Board is expected to become operational soon. Measures have
also been taken to set up Mutual Funds, lay down ground rules for orderly operations
of the Stock Exchanges, improve their infrastructure, facilitate share transfers and
enforce better discipline on companies entering the market. Later in my speech, I shall
be announcing certain further measures which will help to boost investment in new
industries and generate more employment and economic activity.
 46. We have one of the largest pools of scientific and technical manpower.
Yet, many of our young and new entrepreneurs find it difficult to raise equity capital
because of the risk involved. This problem can be solved by allowing Venture Capital
Companies or Funds to invest in new companies in anticipation of future capital
gains. However, such companies at present are not eligible for the concessional
treatment of capital gains available to non-corporate entities. In order to overcome
this problem, it has been decided to formulate a scheme under which approved Venture
Capital Companies/Funds will be enabled to invest in new companies and be eligible
for the concessional treatment of capital gains available to non-corporate entities.
Necessary legislative measures will be taken to bring this into effect.
 47. At present, a tax concession is available for investment in the equity shares
of new industrial undertakings. Small investors generally find it difficult to take
advantage of these concessions because of absence of sufficient information about the
prospects of new companies. It has been decided that concession now available for
direct investment in equity shares of new industrial undertakings will also be available
for investment in special units of mutual funds where the resources are earmarked for
investment in new projects. This will help new companies to raise capital more easily.
 48. I also propose to provide a seperate exemption upto Rs.3,000 for income
from dividends under Section 80L of the Income tax Act. This will be in addition to
the existing concessions available for certain types of incomes, including dividends
upto Rs.7,000 and a further Rs.3,000 for income from investments in Unit Trust of
India and certain other specified investments which I am including in the Finance Bill.
 49. Sharp fluctuations in international exchange rates have posed problems
for exporters as well as for Indian industry. In order to provide some protection to
 10

individual projects from exchange rate fluctuations, financial institutions will introduce
a new scheme whereby promoters of such projects can have their foreign currency
loans designated in rupees. The interest rate on such loans will be variable and will
include an exchange premium. The details of the scheme will be announced by the
Industrial Development Bank of India separately.
 50. It has been the policy of this Government to encourage workers’
participation in management in industry. It is only through interaction and involvement
of workers in management that we can improve the overall performance, increase
productivity, and prevent sickness. Government has already announced a scheme to
facilitate such participation. I am happy to inform the House that complete exemption
from Income tax will be given in respect of all expenditure incurred by companies in
connection with introducing schemes for workers’ participation. Government has also
introduced a scheme whereby 5 per cent of the capital issues are reserved for employees.
In order to facilitate purchase of shares by workers in their own companies, banks are
being asked to provide loans liberally for this purpose. Reserve Bank of India will be
issuing necessary instructions shortly.
 51. Working journalists have contributed a lot to the country by their
intellectual toil, and suggestions have been received that a Bill should be considered
by the Parliament to provide a reasonable pension scheme for them. Government will
be taking appropriate steps in this direction after consulting all concerned.
 52. Government attaches considerable importance to strengthening economic
and cultural ties with Indian nationals settled abroad. A number of facilities, including
fiscal concessions, have been extended to Non-Resident Indians for facilitating
investments. In response to representations received, Government have now decided
to introduce a new scheme of Foreign Currency denominated Bonds/Deposit Certificates
for Non-Resident Indians on a non-repatriable basis. The maturity period of these
Bonds/Deposit Certificates will be 7 years and these will carry an interest rate higher
than that applicable to the repatriable foreign currency non-Resident deposits. These
Bonds/Deposits will be free from Income tax, Wealth tax and Gift tax.
 53. The fiscal regime for investments and deposits by Non-Resident Indians
in our country has been made quite liberal. It is the Government’s intention to maintain
fiscal stability. No changes willl be made in the tax treatment which might adversely
affect investments already made by Non-Resident Indians.
 54. The success of Non-Resident Indians in many fields of scientific, economic
and cultural endeavour has been a matter of great satisfaction to us. We cherish our
continued association with them.
 55. I also propose to introduce certain measures for boosting small savings
collections. I am particularly keen to mobilise untapped rural savings. A new scheme
without tax concession, but with flexibility of encashment after two and half years of
 11

deposit, is being introduced. The rate of interest will progressively increase for longer
durations. The deposit will double in value after five and half years. This instrument
will attract new investments as it can be encashed as and when funds are needed. The
instrument will be called KISAN VIKAS PATRA.
 56. Last year a new savings scheme based on the net savings principle, was
announced by the Prime Minister. Under this scheme, 50 per cent of deposits upto a
maximum of Rs.20,000 are eligible for deduction under Section 80CCA of Income tax
Act. However, in the year of withdrawal, 50 per cent of the amount withdrawn is
added to the taxable income. The interest rate on deposits was 9 per cent. It has been
decided to raise the interest rate to 11 per cent. The new rate will be applicable to
existing deposits also with effect from 1st April of last year. Further, the rate of
deduction at the time of deposit will be raised from 50 per cent to 100 per cent with
corresponding increase in the amount subject to tax at the time of withdrawal. The
amount eligible for deposit is also being increased to Rs.30,000 per annum with effect
from next financial year.
 57. The doubling period for Indira Vikas Patra sold from 1st March, 1988
will be reduced to five years.
 58. It is also proposed to continue the sale of Rahat Patra beyond 29th February,
1988. With the continuance of Rahat Patra, sale of Capital Investment Bonds is proposed
to be discontinued from 1st April, 1988.
 59. Sir, I have taken this opportunity to announce certain measures for the
welfare of the weaker and vulnerable sections of our society, for generating greater
employment opportunities, particularly in the rural areas and for strengthening our
productive base. I am sure these measures will contribute to fulfilling the aspirations
of our people.
 60. Let me now turn to the Revised Estimates for 1987-88 and Budget
Estimates for 1988-89.
Revised Estimates 1987-88
 61. The Revised Estimates of total expenditure in the Budget for 1987-88 are
placed at Rs.66161 crores against Rs.62942 crores in the Budget Estimates. As the
gravity of the drought became clear, the first task of the Government was to ensure
that sufficient resources were available with State Governments in order to start relief
works and take other measures for alleviating the distress caused by the drought.
Central Teams were despatched to States and decisions announced in record time in
respect of ceilings of expenditure for States affected by drought and floods. Expenditure
from the Central Budget on account of drought, floods and other natural calamities is
now estimated at nearly Rs.2,000 crores. This includes Centre’s share of margin money,
advance Plan assistance for drought, non-Plan assistance for floods and hailstorm,
supply of subsidised foodgrains in drought affected areas, subsidised supply of seeds,
 12

provision of rigs for drinking water and assistance for Accelerated Rural Water Supply
Programme.
 62. There have been certain other inevitable increases in expenditure. The
subsidy on indigenous fertilizers will go up by Rs.300 crores. Food subsidy will also
be Rs.200 crores higher. I am sure Hon’ble Members will agree with me that, under
the circumstances prevailing in the current year, the increases are fully justified. The
liberalisation of pensionary benefits of Government employees, particularly the Defence
Services personnel, is expected to add Rs.374 crores to the pension bill in the current
year. Financial relief granted to certain public sector enterprises are expected to cost
additional Rs.417 crores by way of subsidy, write off of loans etc. Interest charges are
likely to be Rs.800 crores higher than the original Budget provision. Taking into
account the other variations, the total non-Plan expenditure during the current year is
estimated to be Rs.1,971 crores higher than the original Budget provision of Rs.39,265
crores.
 63. Central assistance for State and U.T.Plans is expected to be Rs.1,127 crores
higher mainly due to larger advance Plan assistance to States affected by drought.
Budgetary support for Central Plan is estimated to be Rs.121 crores higher - this being
the net effect of increases in sectors like agriculture, rural development, fertilizers,
agricultural financial institutions, subsidy for setting up industries in backward areas,
etc. offset by savings in certain other sectors.
 64. Taking the Plan and non-Plan together, there is an increase of Rs.3,219
crores. As a result of a series of measures undertaken by Government during the year,
economy consciousness has been created and expenditure contained particularly in
low priority areas.
 65. Gross Tax Revenue is estimated to yield Rs. 1,028 crores more than the
Budget Estimates mainly under Income and Corporation taxes and Customs duties.
The share of States in taxes will be higher by Rs.392 crores. Non-tax Receipts will be
higher by Rs.2,201 crores. Of this, non-tax revenue receipts are expected to fetch
Rs.765 crores more and capital receipts Rs.1,436 crores more. Rs.700 crores of the
increase in capital receipts will be from market loans.
 66. Taking the variations in expenditure and receipts into account, the current
year is expected to end with an overall deficit of Rs.6080 crores. Notwithstanding the
severe strain the events of the year have cast on the Budget, this is close to the original
estimate of Rs.5,688 crores.
Budget Estimates for 1988-89
 67. The Hon’ble Members will agree that Budget Estimates for the year 1988-
89 are being presented in a rather difficult environment. We have to ensure that,
despite pressures on the Budget, there is no cut-back in public investments, as that
would have an adverse effect on economic activity and employment. Accordingly, in
 13

framing the Budget for next year, highest priority has been given to maintaining the
tempo of Plan investment.
 68. The Central Plan for 1988-89 has been fixed at Rs.28,715 crores against
the approved outlay of Rs.24,622 crores in the crurrent year, a step up of 16.6 per
cent. Even compared to the revised Central Plan outlay of Rs.25,701 crores, the next
year’s outlay represents a step up of 11.7 per cent. Central Plan for the next year will
be financed to the extent of Rs.16,000 crores from budgetary resources and Rs.12,715
crores from Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources of public enterprises. With the
proposed outlay for 1988-89, we would have achieved in four years more than 86 per
cent of the Seventh Plan outlay in real terms.
 69. In addition, Central Budget for the next year provides Rs.9,714 crores for
assitance for State and UT Plans. The total Plan expenditure in the Budget for the next
year is thus, Rs.25,714 crores compared to Rs.24,925 crores in the Revised Estimates
for the current year.
 70. I am glad to inform the House that the total transfers from Centre to
States in 1987-88, including their share in taxes, were Rs.24,870 crores. In 1988-89
such transfers are estimated at Rs.26,348 crores, an increase of Rs.1478 crores.
 71. Several States have represented that their liquidity position has been
affected by the drought and have requested for some relaxation in the Ways and
Means limits. The Hon’ble Members will be happy to know that Reserve Bank of
India is raising from tomorrow the Ways and Means limits by 40 per cent over the
limits prevailing prior to October, 1986. These were stepped up by 30 per cent and 20
per cent for different periods of the year in October,1986.
 72. As mentioned earlier, it has been decided to increase the outlays of the
Departments of Agriculture and Cooperation and Water Resources by 40 per cent
above the current year’s outlay. I also propose to provide Rs.671 crores for fertilizer
projects in 1988-89. During the current year, four new fertilizer plants, two each in
public and private sectors, are likely to go into poduction. Fertilizer production is
expected to attain a level of 7.1 million tonnes this year, an increase of nearly 40 per
cent over the output at the commencement of the Seventh Plan.
 73. The major anti-poverty programmes, namely, Integrated Rural
Development Programme (IRDP), National Rural Employment Programme (NREP)
and Rural Landless Employment Guarantee Programme (RLEGP) will continue to be
the main instruments for generating employment and increasing the earning
opportunities for those below the poverty-line. Thus far, about 254 lakh families have
been assisted with a total investment of Rs.8,413 crores under IRDP. Forty per cent of
these beneficiaries belong to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Under NREP
and RLEGP, 7,006 lakh man-days were generated in 1986-87 which was substantially
higher than the target of 5,115 lakh man-days. The target is likely to be exceeded this
year also.
 14

 74. These programmes have proved highly successful in generating
employment in our rural areas. Suggestions have been received for expansion of these
programmes as well as for their reorganisation. The merger of some important
programmes, like the National Rural Employment Programme, Accelerated Rural Water
Supply Programme, Rural Landless Employment Guarantee Programme and Desert
Development Programme, and various other Anti Poverty Programmes has also been
suggested so that available resources can be more effectively deployed to meet the
twin objectives of employment and creation of assets to meet village needs. There is
also need to provide flexibility at the operational level. In the light of these suggestions,
it is proposed to undertake a thorough review of the employment programmes in the
coming year to examine the possibility of having a comprehensive programme.
 75. Rural water supply continues to receive high priority. The technology
mission for drinking water in villages and related water management is being pursued
vigorously. In 1988-89, I propose to provide Rs.2,200 crores for the Department of
Rural Development, inclusive of Rs.430 crores for rural water supply and sanitation.
As Hon’ble Members are aware, the outlay on water supply is in addition to the
Minimum Needs Programme outlay in the State Sector.
 76. Welfare programmes for the tribal people have to be based on respect and
understanding of their culture and tradition, and appreciation of their social,
psychological and economic problems. The main instrument for the development of
tribal people and tribal areas is the Tribal sub-Plan. As the Hon’ble Members know,
the Tribal sub-Plans are financed by the State Governments, Special Central Assistance,
Centrally Sponsored Programmes and financial institutions. The Special Central
Assistance for Tribal sub-Plan for 1988-89 is Rs.185 crores. For Scheduled Castes,
Special Component Plans are being formulated with the primary objective of providing
occupational mobility and economic strength. In the current year, over 20 lakh
Scheduled Caste families are likely to be benifited by these programmes. An amount
of Rs.180 crores has been provided as Special Central Additive to Special Component
Plans for 1988-89.
 77. Our human resources are the most important resource of all. The quality
of manpower developed today will be decisive in determining the pace and direction
of economic and social progress in the future. In 1986, a new Education Policy was
introduced after extensive discussion in Parliament and outside. In order to give a
good start to the new Policy, last year, while presenting the Budget, the Prime Minister
raised the allocation for education sharply to Rs.800 crores from Rs.352 crores in
1986-87. The actual expenditure is likely to be of the order of Rs.700 crores. Next
year’s Plan makes an allocation of Rs.800 crores. Together with the non-Plan provision,
the total allocation for the Department of Education in 1988-89 will be Rs.1,550
crores against the Revised Estimate of Rs.1,185 crores for 1987-88.
 78. Improvement in the health status of the population is an essential
component of the human resource development. To achieve this, special emphasis is
 15

being laid on establishing primary health facilities, particularly in rural areas, launching
control programmes for major communicable and non-communicable diseases,
augmenting facilities for medical and para-medical education and training and providing
family welfare, maternity and child health, immunization and related services. Under
the National Leprosy Eradication Programme, multi-drug treatment has been extended
to nearly 2.2 million cases out of the estimated 4 million cases. The Universal
Immunization Programme is being extended to 120 districts, besides 182 districts
already covered. Health Contingency Plans have been prepared for drought affected
States. I propose an outlay of Rs.228 crores for medical and public health programmes
and Rs.600 crores for family welfare programmes for 1988-89.
 79. Government have initiated a number of measures to ameliorate the
conditions of working women. These include programmes for raising skills and
economic development, supportive services for working women and shelter and
rehabilitation for women in adverse circumstances. For children, a nation-wide
programme of Integrated Child Development Services has been in operation. An
important objective of these ICDS Programmes is to reduce childhood mortality,
morbidity and malnutrition. I am happy to inform the Hon’ble Members that 1,738
Integrated Child Development Services Projects have been sanctioned for the most
backward rural areas, tribal areas and urban slums in the country. During the remaining
period of the Seventh Five Year Plan, we will be covering most of the tribal blocks
with more than 30 per cent Scheduled Tribe population and also the slums in big
cities. For the next year, I propose an outlay of Rs.235 crores for the Department of
Women and Child Development.
 80. Energy, Transport and Communications constitute the basic infrastructure
of the economy. A total allocation of Rs.16,588 crores is being provided for these
sectors. This outlay represents an increase of about 25 per cent over the current year’s
level, and accounts for about 58 per cent of the total Plan outlay for 1988-89.
 81. Electricity generation has been increasing at an annual rate of 9 to 10 per
cent during the Seventh Plan. Though hydro-generation was adversely affected by
drought this year, thermal generation registered an improvement of 16 per cent during
the first nine months of the current year compared to the corresponding period of last
year. The plant load factor of the thermal plants has improved further and is expected
to touch 55 per cent, the highest in the last 10 years. I am providing for an outlay of
Rs.3,963 crores for the Power sector, that is, an increase of over 32 per cent over the
current year’s outlay.
 82. Coal is the primary and the most abundant source of conventional energy
in our country. I am stepping up the provision for this sector by 30 per cent, to a level
of Rs.1,733 crores for 1988-89. The production of coal during the current year is
expected to reach 182 million tonnes as against the last year’s level of 166 million
tonnes.
 16

 83. As Hon’ble Members are aware, our Petroleum and Natural Gas sector
has taken great strides during this decade. The rebound in international oil prices has
underlined the urgency for finding and exploiting hydro-carbon resources. Significant
discoveries during the year in Krishna-Godavari Off-shore Region and the Bhuvanagiri
area of the Cauvery Basin constitute promising rewards to our heavy investments in
oil exploration. The year also saw the completion of the first section from Hazira to
Bijaipur of the HBJ Pipeline covering 642 kilometres. To maintain the tempo of
exploration and production of crude oil and natural gas, I propose an outlay of Rs.3,395
crores for the Petroleum sector.
 84. In the field of communications I must share with the House a sense of
pride in the work of the Centre for Development of Telematics.By developing a state-
of-art electronic switching system, C-DoT has demonstrated what we can achieve
through proper organisation and marshalling of our scientific talents. I am allocating
Rs.1,873 crores for 1988-89 for the Department of Telecommunications - an increase
of 44 per cent over the outlay for the current year.
 85. Government recognises the development of our scientific and technological
capabilities as a necessary pre-requisite for the economic development of the nation.
With this in view, I propose to increase the outlay of the Scientific Departments by
about 20 per cent over the current year’s level. We can take justifiable pride in the
many achievements of our scientists and technologists. While there have been many
notable developments during the year, I would like to make a special mention of one
of these. On August 26, 1987, the Prime Minister had informed the Hon’ble Members
that India was the first applicant to be allotted a mine site in the Central Indian Ocean
by the Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-bed Authority. This is a
significant step forward in development of our scientific potential. The mine site of
1,50,000 sq.kms. contains a rich deposit of polymetallic nodules.
 86. Many other initiatives are envisaged in the different sectors of the economy.
However, I do not propose to take the valuable time of the House with a detailed
review of all the Plan programmes. The full details are available in the Budget
documents.
 87. The allocation for Defence is Rs.13,000 crores against Rs.12,000 crores
in the current year. Our armed forces, in the face of unwarranted provocations, have
done a tremendous job of protecting our borders. Our jawans are the nation’s strength.
We shall continue to provide them the requisite support in their efforts. Food and
fertilizer subsidies are placed at Rs.5,300 crores against Rs.4,410 crores in the current
year. Interest charges next year are estimated at Rs.14,100 crores agianst Rs.11,450
crores in the current year. The allocation for export promotion and market development
is Rs.1,091 crores. The other increases relate to grants payable to States for revision
of pay scales of university and college teachers, grants and loans to foreign
Governments, strengthening of police forces and payment of Rs.100 crores to Oil
 17

Industry Development Board. A lump sum provision of Rs.800 crores has been made for
additional D.A. instalments that may become payable to Government employees next
year. I would like to assure the Hon’ble Members that I have kept the non-Plan expenditure
to the barest minimum. Non-Plan expenditure in 1988-89 will thus be Rs.47,896 crores
against Rs.41,236 crores in the Revised Estimates for the current year.
 88. Coming to receipts, Gross Tax Revenue at existing rates of taxation is
estimated at Rs.41985 crores. After payment of Rs.10682crores to States and local
bodies as their share of taxes, the net revenue to the Centre next year is estimated at
Rs.31303 crores. Receipts from market loans are placed at Rs.7,000 crores, that is, the
same level as in the current year. External assistance, net of repayments, is placed at
Rs.3,734 crores, against Rs.3,184 crores in the current year. Taking into account the
variations in other receipts and expenditure, Budget deficit for the next year at existing
rates of taxation is estimated at Rs.8120 crores.


