 SPEECH OF SHRI MORARJI R. DESAI MINISTER OF FINANCE
 INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1962-63(Final)


 Sir,
 A little over a month ago, I had presented in the last Session of the Second Lok
Sabha the statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of
India for the year 1962-63 and obtained a vote on account. Today I rise to request this
House to, consider and approve these estimates, with a few small variations which I
shall explain later, for the year as a whole.
 2. When presenting the interim Budget I had reviewed the economic
conditions in the year 1961-62. I had referred to the sizable increases in production,
both industrial and agricultural, the restoration of a measure of stability in the price
level, the favourable trends in external aid for the fulfilment of our plan as well as the
seriousness of our foreign exchange situation. It is not my intention to cover the same
ground again as there is relatively little that is new which I can add to what I said in
my Budget Speech last month and to what has been stated more fully in the Economic
Survey, both of which are being circulated with the budget papers today.
 3. For more than a decade now, economic policy in the country has been
geared to the implementation of successive Five-Year Plans of development. In
retrospect, the First Five-Year Plan seems to have been a modest affair, but it laid the
foundation of further effort. We launched on a bigger and bolder programme in our
Second Plan with its emphasis on the development of basic and heavy industries.
Though we faced many difficulties-particularly foreign exchange difficulties-in its
implementation there is no doubt that the Indian economy has emerged greatly
strengthened by it. Indeed, the success of our efforts seems to have led to a world-wide
recognition of the value of planning as an instrument for the uplift of the less-developed
countries.
 4. Our Third Plan, which was launched a year ago, aims at raising our national
income in real terms by some 30 per cent over the five years. It also has to take us
appreciably closer to the objective of a self-generating economy which can continue
to develop at a satisfactory rate without external aid. The Plan envisages an outlay of
Rs.7,500 crores in the public sector. This figure is about two-thirds higher than the
corresponding one for the Second Plan. The total investment of Rs.10,400 crores that
we seek to achieve during the Third Plan equals the actual investment undertaken
during the first two Plan periods put together. Even with this increase in the size of
our Plan, we are unable to accommodate all the legitimate aspirations of our people
 1

for more schools and roads, for more power and drinking water, for more transport
and employment opportunities. Many worthwhile and desirable projects, both public
and private, cannot be taken up because we could not make provision for them in our
Plan for lack of resources. It is, therefore, of the greatest importance that we should do
everything possible to mobilise and harness the resources which will help us to reach
the goals that we, as a nation, have set for ourselves.
 5. The most critical shortage which we face and which operates as a major
limiting factor in everything that we do is of external resources. The Economic Survey
has dwelt at length on our difficult foreign exchange position during the first year of
the Third Plan. Despite the availability of substantial external assistance and the
assurance of aid to cover a large part of our project requirements, the ways and means
position in regard to foreign exchange remains acutely difficult. Our foreign exchange
reserves have declined to very low levels and the need for conserving foreign exchange
by the strictest watch on imports and by limiting our demands within the resources in
sight is greater than ever today. Beyond a point, however, economy in imports of
essential requirements becomes self-defeating in that it inhibits domestic production,
raises prices, and in consequence, leads to a fall in exports. Further, shortages in the
key sectors cannot but weaken and slow down our plan.
 6. The assistance which we receive from friendly countries and institutions
is therefore of critical importance. At the same time, without belittling in any way the
value of this assistance, we must recognise that ultimately it is only through increasing
our exports that we can find the external resources for our development and for repaying
the loans and credits which we receive. I shall later outline some of the fiscal measures
which I propose to adopt to help our exports.
 7. It is important to remember that increased exports and economy in imports
which are necessary in view of our foreign exchange situation must mean a restraint
in domestic consumption. A degree of control over domestic consumption is implicit
in our effort to step up investment to substantially higher levels than we have achieved
in the past. In the ultimate analysis, it is not money, but men and materials which pay
for a Plan. The resources we need may be measured and expressed in terms of money,
but they represent in reality the extent to which we can employ current production for
increasing our productive capacity in the future rather than for meeting the needs of
current consumption.
 8. Thus, our effort to provide resources for the Plan, the exports to earn the
foreign exchange and the saving to provide the investment, inevitably lead to a measure
of restraint in current consumption. We can achieve it somewhat painlessly through
voluntary savings. We can do it with a certain sense of social obligation through taxes.
Or we can bring it about through an inflationary rise in prices which hurts the common
man and benefits only the speculators and profiteers.
 2

 9. All savings strengthen our Plan, whether they are large or small, whether
they are put in banks, or in insurance policies, or in Government securities, or in our
Small Savings Schemes, or in Provident Funds. If the volume of savings is adequate,
the task of ensuring that they are allocated between different sectors and fields of
development according to the priorities in our Plan should not be too difficult. By
controlling non-Plan investment as well as through proper fiscal and other policies,
we can channel the flow of savings into the public sector and the private sector, into
industry and agriculture, into transport and power, into education and health, according
to the priorities and allocations in the Plan. The important thing, however, is to raise
the level of savings in the country to an adequate level.
 10. The banking system has an important role to play in this. A couple of
years ago, there had been signs of a lack of confidence, particularly in some of the
smaller banks. I am happy to say that as a result of various measures which we have
taken, including the scheme of deposit insurance which came into force at the beginning
of this year, our banking system stands greatly strengthened. The Governor of the
Reserve Bank, with whom I recently discussed the matter, mentioned with special
satisfaction the fact that the smaller banks will, in his judgement, continue to play a
useful and important role in our economy. The State Bank has been opening branches
in semi-urban and rural areas. The Reserve Bank is making special efforts to facilitate
the availability of credit at low rates of interest to agriculture.
 11. Although considerable progress has been made in all these directions and
bank deposits are steadily on the increase, the banking system does not find it too easy
to meet all the demands for funds which are generated by our growing industries and
rising levels of production. It seems to me desirable that industry in the private sector
should exercise a greater measure of restraint in relying on bank finance. I say this not
because I want to slow down the development of the private sector which is as much
a part of our Plan as the public sector, but because private industry has available to it
another source of finance which has, in the recent past, become exceedingly important.
I refer to finance in the shape of equity capital. There was a time when it was difficult
to get a new issue subscribed and only big commercial houses could afford to set up
major enterprises. This situation is fast changing. The public at large, even people
with modest incomes, are now investing in shares. This is a healthy sign which we
must encourage. Government have, therefore been encouraging existing companies,
which wish to branch into new lines of production, to start new companies. Further, in
the floatation of new companies, there should be the maximum opportunity for public
participation. It seems also desirable that new companies should aim at raising a
larger proportion of the capital they need through equity shares, rather than by loans,
as they did in the past. The pursuit of these policies will mean that the ownership of
private industry will become more wide-based and the concentration of economic
power will be reduced.
 3

 12. The banking system also provides finance to the public sector. Apart from
the investments which It makes in Government securities public sector undertakings
draw upon the banks to meet their requirements of working capital. Life insurance
like banking is yet another source of finance for our development. The Life insurance
Corporation is a major investor in Government securities. It also contributes to the
development in the private sector. It is making special efforts to popularise insurance
in the rural areas through its Janata Scheme and is using Panchayats and Co-operative
Societies in order to spread insurance in the villages.
 13. In the effort to mobilise savings for the public sector, I attach the greatest
importance to the Small Savings movement. During the Second Plan period, the net
collections from small savings, including Prize Bonds, amounted to nearly Rs.415
crores, which was roughly 9 per cent of the total outlay in the public sector in the
Second Plan. The Third Plan target for net collections from small savings is Rs.600
crores. We had, accordingly, budgeted last year for a net collection of Rs.105 crores
from small savings. But judging from the progress of collections during the year,
the revised estimates presented last month came down to Rs.95 crores and 1 would
not rule out the possibility of actuals being even lower. Clearly, we shall have to
redouble our efforts to make the Small Savings Scheme a success, particularly in
the rural areas. I would invite the co-operation of every Member of this House in
this great task.
 14. The Government must, of course, for its part, do a great deal too. We have
to improve our selling arrangements as well as service to the small saver. We must
devise new schemes to suit his needs. This is engaging my urgent attention at the
moment. I can make one announcement straightaway. At present, contributions to
Provident Fund and to life insurance policies are, within certain limits, eligible for a
rebate on income-tax. However, for those who are not salaried workers or wage-earners,
there is no scheme of Provident Fund. The opportunity for life insurance is also subject
to medical cheeks. To make available some kind of an arrangement analogous to a
Provident Fund for people who are self-employed and not salaried workers, I propose
to extend and modify the Cumulative Time Deposit Scheme run by the Post Offices.
At present monthly deposits can be made under the scheme for a period of 5 or 10
years. We shall now introduce, in addition, a 15-year account with a maximum monthly
deposit limit of Rs.300. The existing limit of a maximum monthly deposit in a 10-year
account will also be raised from Rs.l00 to Rs.200 per month. At the same time, the
contributions made to the 10 and 15 years accounts will be allowed to earn a rebate of
income-tax as in the case of life insurance premia and contributions to recognised
Provident Funds and subject to the same limits.
 15. The Third Five-Year Plan lays considerable emphasis on realising adequate
surpluses from public enterprises and envisages a contribution of Rs.450 crores from
this source in addition to the sum of Rs.100 crores to be raised by the Railways. We
must get an adequate return on the vast amount of capital we are investing in our
 4

railways, power plants, irrigation works, fertiliser plants, steel plants and the like. By
making past investments pay for future investments, the rate of economic growth can
be accelerated. This is the experience of all countries irrespective of whether they rely
mainly on the public or the private sector for development. The private sector in India
is already relying, to a considerable extent, on the ploughing back of the profits and
savings in the corporate sector for its expansion. The public sector must do the same
If it is to play an increasing role in the development of our economy. This means not
only efficient and economical operation of public sector plants, but also a policy of
charging a proper fee or price for the services and products supplied by the public
sector. Betterment levies, water rates, electricity charges, railway freights and the like
cannot be determined on the philosophy of no profit and no loss’, but on the
consideration that all these services and facilities need to be enlarged and their users
must pay more for these things today in order that there may be plenty of them tomorrow
and the day after. Our price policy must ensure that investment in key and basic
industries earns a good enough return to make higher investment possible. Situations
may, of course, arise in which a certain industry or a service needs to be subsidised.
But even subsidies can only be given out of surpluses arising somewhere else. Whenever
we accept the need for a subsidy at any one place, we should remember that it will call
for bigger surpluses elsewhere.
 16. I should now like to give an account of the budget estimates for 1962-63.
 17. In the budget presented on 14th March, 1962, the revenue receipts were
estimated at ‘Rs.1305.87 crores and expenditure at Rs.1369.33 crores, leaving a deficit
on revenue account of Rs.63.46 crores. As a result of the changes that have since been
made, the revenue deficit, on the basis of existing taxation, is now estimated to go
down to Rs.60.78 crores.
 18. I should now like to explain briefly some of the important variations.
 19. Apart from the changes which are really a regrouping of certain Demands
for grants following the recent reorganisation of certain Ministries and which have
been referred to in the Explanatory Memorandum, there are five items which account
for an increase in the estimates of revenue expenditure. The largest of these is on
account of the increase in dearness allowance. The last Pay Commission had
recommended that whenever the working class consumer price index remained, on an
average, 10 points above 11,5 for a period of 12 months, Government should review
the question of increasing the dearness allowance. As this condition was satisfied
during the period November 1960 to October 1961, it has been decided to increase the
dearness allowance of employees drawing basic pay below Rs.400 per month. The
increase will range between Rs.5 and Rs.10 with suitable marginal adjustments and
will be given with retrospective effect from 1st November 1961. As this decision was
taken only a few days ago, it has not been possible to work out the additional
requirements under each Demand. Accordingly, a lump provision of Rs.7.38 crores
 5

has been included as a miscellaneous item in a single Demand which will be surrendered
at the end of the year and the Ministries will be expected to go in for supplementary
grants, to the extent necessary, during the course of the year.
 20. I have already referred to the importance of increasing our export earnings.
The promotion of sales abroad is a costly business. Apart from the expenditure on
staff which Government employ, both at home and abroad, for this purpose and the
money which they spend on participation in fairs and exhibitions abroad, industry
itself must spend a great deal more for this purpose, and be prepared occasionally to
incur a loss. In deserving cases, it may be necessary for Government to provide financial
assistance to industries when they are in no position to carry the whole burden of
promotion themselves. It may also be necessary to make grants to organisations set up
by Government or industry for promoting exports. I am, therefore, providing a sum of
Rs.1 crore for export promotion and development.
 21. The Government of India have been examining for some time now the
difficulties experienced by industries located at great distances from the coal fields-more
particularly industries in the southern and western regions-in obtaining adequate
supplies of coal. In addition to the measures already taken for stepping up the movement
of coal by sea to these regions, we have now decided to make available additional
import of furnace oil, to the extent possible, with our limited foreign exchange resources.
To facilitate the use of furnace oil by industries located at some distance from the
ports, we propose to make a reduction in the cost of transport of the furnace oil from
the ports to the points of consumption. The arrangement briefly will be that in accepting
consignments of furnace oil from various ports, the railways will recover from the
consignor or the consignee, as the case may be, only half the freight charges which are
leviable in accordance with the normal tariff rates in force at the time of booking,
subject, however, to the net minimum charge in force at present. The difference between
the amount recovered from the consignor or the consignee and the full freight applicable
will be made good to the railways by a subsidy. A provision of Rs.25 lakhs is being
made for this purpose.
 22. An additional provision of Rs.99 lakhs has been made to accommodate
the proposals approved after the earlier estimates were framed mainly for the purchase
of stores and equipment required by the Survey of India.
 23. Lastly, the estimates of Defence Services show an increase of Rs.1.7 crores
on account of the decision to revise the pay scales of Services officers with retrospective
effect from 1st April, 1960.
 24. As against this increase in estimates of revenue expenditure, I propose to
transfer Rs.15 crores from the profits on coinage operations outstanding under suspense.
Prior to 1956-57, the net profit on coins put into circulation, representing the difference
between their face value and the cost of their metallic content, was kept under a
suspense head, the transfer to revenue being limited to the net expenditure in the year
 6

on the running of the Mints plus a stabilised credit of Rs.45 lakhs. This arrangement
was revised in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General and with effect
from 1956-57, the actual profits on coinage and loss on destruction of uncurrent coins
are adjusted directly as revenue or expenditure. The amount outstanding under the
suspense head was intended to be utilised as a deficit neutralisation reserve and
accordingly, a sum of Rs.10 crores was transferred to revenue in each of the years
1959-60 and 1960-61. The balance at credit under the suspense head at present is a
little over Rs.37 crores and I feel it would be reasonable to transfer Rs.15 crores from
the suspense head to revenue receipts. After taking this transfer into account, the
revenue deficit will go down by Rs.2.68 crores.
 25. On Capital account, the estimates presented last month provided for an
expenditure of Rs.1188 crores for Capital expenditure, including loans to State
Governments and other parties. The loan requirements of Hindustan Aircraft Limited
have since been reduced from Rs.2.5 crores to Rs.1 crore, but this saving will be
offset by an increase of Rs.1.5 crores in the Defence Capital Outlay. In addition, a sum
of Rs.95 lakhs is required for the purchase of bonds of the value of 2 million dollars
to be floated by the United Nations Organisation. The original estimates had provided
for a loan of Rs.9.88 crores to the Railway Development Fund from the General
Revenues which the Railways would not now be requiring. After taking into account
the effect of the transfer of profits on coinage, the Capital budget will show a
deterioration of Rs.6.07 crores which will be counterbalanced to the extent of Rs.2.68
crores by the improvement in the Revenue budget. In the net, the overall deficit will
increase from Rs.147 crores estimated last month to Rs.150 crores.


