 SPEECH OF SHRI R.VENKATARAMAN MINISTER OF FINANCE
 INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1981-82


Sir,
 It is my privilege, once again, to present the Budget to this august House.
 2. The Budget for 1981-82 has been formulated in an economic situation
which continues to be difficult, but also shows great improvement over the desperate
conditions prevailing a year ago. The “Economic Survey” presented to the House this
week contains a detailed review of developments in the past year. I shall, therefore,
only review the highlights of the economic situation as a background to presenting the
strategy of next year’s budget.
 3. Hon’ble Members will recall that when our Government took office in
January 1980, we inherited an economy in extremely poor shape. It was reeling from
a disastrous economic performance in 1979-80, when the Gross National Product
declined by 4.5 per cent and prices increased by over 21 per cent. Neglect and
mismanagement of the infrastructure had produced a crisis situation in key sectors
such as coal, power and railways.
 4. Faced with this grim situation, our overriding objective was to arrest the
deterioration and set the economy once again on the path of stability and growth. This
was no easy task. The severe drought of 1979-80, and the accumulated problems in
management of the infrastructure, cast a long shadow over 1980-81.
 5. Efforts to improve infrastructure performance deserved and received the
highest priority in 1980-81. A mechanism for crisis management was established, with
special administrative arrangements to monitor and co-ordinate Government action in
this area, and to set clear priorities. It took time for these efforts to bear fruit, but by
the middle of the fiscal year, all the three sectors, power, coal and railways showed
distinct improvement.
 6. Power generation suffered in the early months of 1980-81 because of very
low hydroelectric generation. This was a direct consequence of the acute drought of
1979, which left the reservoirs severely depleted through the lean summer months of
1980. Hydro-electric generation picked up after July when most of the reservoirs were
replenished by the monsoon. There was also a very substantial improvement in thermal
generation. The problems of coal availability which had plagued thermal power plants
during 1979, were substantially overcome and rail movement of coal to thermal plants
was organised on a priority basis. Strenuous efforts were also made to improve

 1

operational efficiency by initiating betterment and renovation programmes in the States
with technical advice from Central Agencies. As a result, thermal electricity generation
in November and December 1980 was 21 per cent higher than in the same months in
1979. For the year as a whole, electricity generation is likely to show an increase of
about 6 per cent over 1979-80. However, in the second half of 1980-81 generation
would be about 13 per cent higher than the second half of the previous year.
 7. Coal production in 1980-81 also shows a marked improvement. The
production of coal and lignite had remained more or less stagnant at about 106 million
tonnes since 1976-77. This frustrating spell of stagnation has been broken and
production is expected to exceed 115 million tonnes in 1980-81. Better availability of
power was one of the important factors behind this improved performance.
 8. The railways have shown improvement in the movement of freight in
recent months, breaking a pattern of deterioration witnessed over the past three years.
 9. Industrial production in 1980-81 reflected. The progress made in removing
infrastructure constraints. I have already mentioned that hydro-electric generation was
very low in the first three months of 1980-81 because of the depletion of reservoirs.
The resulting shortage of power depressed industrial production through much of the
first half of 1980-81. However, with the easing of infrastructure constraints in the
second half of the year, industrial production has picked up. For the year as a whole,
it is likely to show a growth of about 4 per cent. This compares with a decline of 1.4
per cent in 1979-80.
 10. In addition to efforts at improving infrastructure performance, the
Government also took wide ranging measures designed to create conditions conducive
to rapid industrial expansion. Hon’ble Members will recall that the Budget for 1980-
81 contained specific fiscal incentives designed to encourage investment activity. This
was followed by the industrial Policy Statement of July 1980 in which several
promotional measures were announced. Steps were also taken in the course of the
year to increase the flow of investment finance to industry. A new policy has been
enunciated to permit investment funds from oil exporting developing countries to
flow into new units in selected industries in the form of portfolio investment. The
guidelines for issue of debentures were revised to permit more effective use of this
instrument for mobilisation of funds.
 11. Although the promotional impact of these measures could not manifest
itself fully in 1980-81 because of infrastructure bottlenecks, they have undoubtedly
set the stage for longer term industrial expansion in the coming years.
 12. The performance of agriculture in 1980-81 gives every ground for
satisfaction and provides great reassurance about the basic health of this vital sector
of our economy. The weather in 1980-81 was favourable in most, but by no means all
parts of the country, and this created conditions conducive to an agricultural recovery.
 2

The total production of food grains in 1980-81 is likely to exceed 132 minion tonnes,
which is more than 23 minion tonnes higher than in 1979-80. It will surpass the
previous peak level achieved in 1918-79, and yet weather conditions were less
favourable than in that year. The gains in food grains production in 1980-81 have been
accompanied by a very substantial recovery in sugarcane production. Production of
fibre crops was also good.
 13. This excellent performance testifies to the soundness of the agricultural
strategy we introduced in the late sixties. This strategy was vigorously pursued in
1980-81. A concerted effort was made to ensure adequate production of quality seeds.
The area under high yielding varieties was expanded to 48 million hectares compared
with only 35.2 million hectares in 1979-80. Large imports of fertilisers were undertaken
to supplement domestic production. Fertiliser consumption in terms of nutrients is
estimated to have increased from 5.26 minion tonnes to 5.6 million tonnes. Expansion
of Irrigation received special attention and the agricultural extension machinery was
strengthened to ensure a more effective transfer of technology.
 14. The excellent performance of agriculture, combined with the beginning
of a recovery in industry is likely to produce an overall growth of 6.5 per cent in the
Gross National Product. This is an important achievement, but I must caution against
complacency. The progress made needs to be consolidated, and further momentum
must be built up if the recovery of 1980-81 is to mature into full-fledged growth next
year. This calls for a realistic assessment of the strengths, as well as the weaknesses,
of the economy.
 15. The economy continued to be subject to inflationary pressure during 1980-
81 although there can be no doubt that there was a marked improvement over 1979-
80. The increase in prices during 1980-81 upto the end of January 1981 has been 13.5
per cent. It was nearly 20 per cent in the same period of the previous year. Inflationary
pressures were particularly severe in the first half of the year because of the after
effects of the drought of 1979 and this was especially evident in the behaviour of
sugar, gur and khandsari prices. With the improvement in the supply situation in the
second half of the year, there was a definite improvement. Prices declined from the
middle of October to the end of December. They have risen since then, partly because
of the unavoidable increase in petroleum prices effected in January. However in recent
weeks, the increase in prices has moderated.
 16. I must caution however that although inflation has abated, it has not been
overcome. The economy remains subject to continuing cost push pressures, including
especially the transmission of international inflation through rising prices of oil and
other essential imports. Since these cost push pressures are likely to persist, continued
vigilance is required in the coming year. It is essential to evolve a strategy for coping
with cost-push inflation effectively by tackling - the problem at its roots. This is not
only a matter of demand management. It also requires an all out effort to increase
efficiency and achieve higher productivity.

 3

 17. Monetary and credit policies in 1980-81 were tailored to the requirements
of the inflationary situation and commercial credit was strictly regulated. In addition,
steps were taken to ensure that the distribution of bank credit conforms to our economic
and social priorities. The Reserve Bank has evolved guidelines to ensure that an
increasing share of priority sector credit is directed to weaker sections, especially
those Identified in the 20 point programme. According to these guidelines, 40 per cent
of priority sector lending is to be earmarked for the agricultural sector. Half of the
direct lending by commercial banks to agriculture and allied activities will be directed
to small and marginal farmers and agricultural labourers. Furthermore, 12.5 per cent
of total credit advanced to small-scale industries will be reserved for rural artisans,
village craftsmen and cottage industries.
 18. The expansion of banking in the rural areas is continuing and the
programme of establishing Regional Rurki Banks has been accelerated. There were
only 60 such banks at the end of December 1979. There will be one hundred by the
end of March 1981. Another 25 Regional Rural Banks will be established in the year
1981-82. It is proposed to increase their number to 170, covering 270 districts, by the
end of the Sixth Plan. A National Bank for Agricultural and Rural Development will
be established as an apex institution to meet the credit needs of the rural community
and a bill to this effect will be introduced shortly.
 19. This is an appropriate occasion to inform the House that we have decided
to undertake a major re-organisation of the Life insurance Corporation in order to
strengthen its ability to meet the challenges of the future. The Corporation has an
impressive record of extending insurance services to the community. In the process it
has grown very considerably in size. It has, therefore, become desirable to restructure
the Corporation into more manageable units in the interest of operational efficiency,
and also to allow an element of healthy competition. Accordingly, we have decided to
re-organise the Corporation into five independent units with a co-ordinating body to
provide supervision and guidance on matters of common interest. I have no doubt that
these changes will improve the quality of service rendered to policy holders. This re-
organisation will impart a greater degree of dynamism into the working of these
institutions, and this will help to extend life insurance into the rural areas, where only
limited headway has been made so far.
 20. The balance of payments situation facing the country gives cause for
concern. Rising prices of imported oil have added enormously to the external payments
burden on the economy. The import bill for crude oil and petroleum products is likely
to reach Rs.5,600 crores in 1980-81, compared with only Rs.1,677 crores two years
ago. Most of the increase is due to the increase in on prices. The total import bill in
1980- 81 is likely to be around Rs.11,300 crores whereas exports are projected to be
only Rs.7.100 crores. Even after allowing for the surplus on net invisibles, the country
has to finance a balance of payments deficit of about Rs.2,000 crores in 1980-81. This
is much larger than the amount of external assistance available and it has led to a
 4

significant draw - down of foreign exchange reserves. It is, therefore, essential to
evolve a strategy for bringing the balance of payments under control. The Government
has already taken a number of steps in this direction.
 21. High priority has been accorded to oil and natural gas exploration in order
to reduce our dependence on imported supplies as much as possible. The Oil and
Natural Gas Commission has found evidence of hydrocarbons in several structures
both offshore and onshore and it is essential to pursue the exploration and development
effort with all the resources at our command. To this end, an ambitious programme is
envisaged for the Oil and Natural Gas Commission and 011 India Ltd. The urgency of
the situation is also such that the Government has decided to supplement our domestic
capability by engaging foreign parties on contract, on a production sharing basis, to
hasten the pace of exploration and development of potential oil fields. It is expected
that the foreign companies selected under this scheme will commence work in the
second half of 1981-82.
 22. The balance of payments situation also cans for strong support to exports
and the Government has taken several important initiatives in this regard recently.
Hon’ble Members will recall that in my Budget Speech last year I stated that the
Government had taken a decision to establish an Export-import Bank to assist in the
financing of international trade. The details of this proposal have now been worked
out, and it is proposed to introduce a Bill in the current session for setting up the
Export import Bank as a Statutory Corporation. I am providing Rs.70 crores in the
Budget for this purpose.
 23. There is also considerable scope for import substitution by increasing
domestic production and expanding capacity in sectors such as steel, cement, fertiliser,
non-ferrous metals and oilseeds. This is being vigorously pursued.
 24. The strategy of the Budget I am about to present flows from my assessment
of the state of the economy. We have come out of the crisis situation which prevailed
a year ago. The agricultural sector has recovered and is well poised for continued
growth. The industrial recovery is as yet partial, but the various policy initiatives
already taken have created conditions favourable for an industrial revival. With further
improvement in infrastructure performance, the constraints on industry in the coming
year should be substantially eased. The emphasis in 1981-82 must therefore shift from
crisis management to growth.
 25. The tasks ahead of us have been clearly indicated in the Sixth Plan, which
has now been approved by the National Development Council. The Plan establishes a
target of 5.2 per cent growth per annum and cans for an ambitious public sector
investment programme of Rs.97,500 crores. As in the past, agricultural development,
with special emphasis on the weaker sections, is the centrepiece of our development
strategy. But the Sixth Plan also identifies some other areas which have become
especially critical. The energy-transport system comprising such critical sectors as
 5

power, coal, oil, ports and railways, requires massive investments if these sectors are
not to become a constraint upon economic growth.
 26. The Budget must make a beginning in undertaking these large and urgent
tasks. But it must do so in the full knowledge that the threat of inflation has not been
fully overcome. The fiscal deficit should therefore be kept within tolerable limits. At
the same time, taxation must be used judiciously so that it does not fan the flames of
inflation as happened in 1979-80.
 27. Along with fiscal discipline we must also take steps to encourage the flow
of private savings into the financial system. Only thus can we ensure adequate
availability of non-inflationary financing to meet the rapidly expanding needs of the
economy. This flow of resources into the financial system is threatened in two ways
and we must tackle both.
 28. First of all, it is threatened by the pernicious growth of the black economy.
This generates income flows which cannot easily surface in the financial system, and
are therefore directed into socially harmful activity such as hoarding, profiteering,
speculation and wasteful consumption. This only stokes the fires of inflation. The
Government has recently taken a major initiative to direct some of the resources
circulating in the black economy into the public exchequer through the sale of Special
Bearer Bonds. Further action on a wide front is necessary to check the generation of
black money so that this social evil is progressively eliminated from our society.
 29. A second impediment to financial savings is the existence of high rates of
inflation. In an inflationary situation it becomes essential to provide adequate incentives
to financial savings. Since bank deposits are the most important single mechanism for
financial savings, it has been decided to raise the interest rate on maturities from one
and upto five years. An announcement to this effect is being made by the Reserve
Bank. The interest rate paid on deposits above 1 year maturity and upto 2 years will
be raised from 7 per cent at present to 7.5 per cent. The rate paid on deposits above
two years and upto three years will be raised from 7 per cent at present to 8.5 per cent.
The rate paid on deposits above three years maturity will be raised from 8.5 per cent
at present to 10 per cent.
 30. The interest rate paid by banks on deposits above 5 years is unchanged,
but a new National Savings Certificate will be issued with a maturity of 6 years which
will carry an interest rate of 12 per cent. This will provide the necessary incentive for
encouraging longer term savings.
 31. In addition to these measures. I propose to raise the interest rate ceiling
on debentures from 12 per cent at present to 13.5 per cent. This is in line with the
other interest rate changes proposed, and it will encourage large industrial units to
raise their requirements of investment finance through their own efforts. It is essential
that these units, which have the capacity to mobilise resources through the financial
 6

markets, should make greater efforts in this direction and thus reduce the burden on
the term lending institutions.
 32. At present, public companies are permitted to accept deposits from the
public upto 25 per cent of the aggregate of their paid up share capital and free reserves.
They are also allowed to accept deposits upto 10 per cent of paid up capital and free
reserves either from their shareholders or from others when guaranteed by a Director
of the company. These limits do not apply to inter company deposits. These provisions
governing company deposits will be continued. However, it is proposed to impose a
ceiling of 15 per cent on the interest rate which can be paid on these deposits. The
requisite orders giving effect to these decisions are being issued.
 33. As a further step in facilitating investment in industry we have decided
to relax the requirement under the Stock Exchange guidelines that promoters can
only hold a maximum of 40 per cent of the equity of a new company. This provision
conflicted in some cases with the requirement of the financial institutions that
promoters put up a minimum percentage of the total cost of the project. This potential
contradiction between two different requirements had given rise to considerable
difficulties in the implementation of new projects. In order to overcome these
problems, promoters will be allowed to hold higher equity than the 40 per cent limit
during the initial stages of a project. However, equity holdings above 40 per cent
will have to be divested within three years from the date of commercial production
by an offer of sale to the general public. This rationalisation should speed up the
implementation of new projects in industry.
 34. I am confident that these wide-ranging measures will help to encourage
the flow of savings into the financial system and increase the availability of funds
for industrial investment. They create highly favourable conditions for growth in the
coming year.
 35. Having outlined the broad approach I have adopted in formulating the
Budget and some associated policy initiatives, I will now turn to the Revised estimates
for 1980-81 and the Budget estimates for 1981-82.
REVISED ESTIMATES FOR 1980-81
 36. The Budget estimates for 1980-81 had envisaged a deficit of Rs.1,445
crores. However, as a result of discussions between the States and the Planning
Commission, the State Plan outlays were increased in a number of cases. Central
assistance for State Plans was increased by Rs.310 crores. We have also to provide
additional assistance of Rs.58 crores to the Rural Electrification Corporation. The
provision of short-term loans to the States for supply of agricultural inputs also had to
be increased by Rs.25 crores.
 37. In addition, the Central Government has to provide assistance of Rs.90
crores to the States to help in flood relief work. Special loan assistance of Rs.76
 7

crores is being provided to certain North Eastern States including Assam to meet the
gap in their resources caused by their exceptional difficulties.
 38. A larger provision for subsidies is being made than originally envisaged.
The provision for net outgo on imported fertilisers is being increased by Rs.104 crores.
The provision for food subsidy, subsidy on controlled cloth and provision for cash
compensatory support and market development for exports are also being increased
by Rs.110 crores.
 39. The provision for Defence expenditure has to be increased by
Rs.200 crores.
 40. The financial position of certain public sector undertakings did not show
the recovery anticipated at the Budget stage. Additional non-Plan assistance of Rs.104
crores to these undertakings has therefore become necessary.
 41. Turning to the Central Plan expenditure, I am happy to inform the House
that expenditure in crucial sectors like power, coal and petroleum has been satisfactory.
The House will also be happy to note that the level of disbursements of the Agricultural
Refinance and Development Corporation has far exceeded the initial Budget estimates,
and I am, therefore, providing an additional sum of Rs.126 crores to the Corporation.
An additional provision of Rs.50 crores is being made for industrial Development
Bank of India to enable it to meet its rising commitments. In certain sectors like steel
and civil aviation, there has been a shortfall in internal resources generation and
budgetary support for their Plans has to be significantly stepped up. There may be
some shortfalls in the Plan expenditure in some sectors. However, even after taking
these into account, the budgetary support for the Central Plan in 1980-81 will be
Rs.297 crores higher in the Revised estimates.
 42. The total expenditure of the Central Government is now estimated at
Rs.22,808 crores compared with Rs.21,467 crores in the Budget.
 43. Turning to receipts, I am happy to inform the House that despite the
concessions in income tax allowed in the Budget for 1980-81, tax revenues have not
suffered. My judgement that lower rate of taxation will promote better voluntary
compliance seems to have been vindicated. The receipts from Corporation tax would
be higher by Rs.35 crores compared with the Budget estimate of Rs.1515 crores.
Receipts from Union Excise duties are also estimated to be higher by Rs.99 crores
compated with the Budget estimate of Rs.8265 crores. The receipts from Customs
duties are likely to exceed the Budget estimate of Rs.2989 crores by as much as
Rs.361 crores in the current year due to larger imports and higher international prices.
After deducting the States’ share of various taxes, the net tax revenue of the Centre is
now estimated to be Rs.419 crores more than the Budget estimate of Rs.8922 crores.
 44. Capital receipts too, show an improvement of Rs.245 crores over the
Budget estimate of Rs.7,694 crores. This is because of higher market borrowing of
 8

Re.104 crores and estimated receipts of Rs.200 crores from the sale of Special Bearer
Bonds, offset by some shortfalls elsewhere.
 45. Total receipts are now estimated at Rs.20,833 crores compared with the
Budget estimates of Rs.20,022 crores. The current year is now expected to close with
a deficit of about Rs.1.975 crores. The House will appreciate that almost the entire
increase in the budgetary deficit is accounted for by larger budgetary support for State
and Central Plans.
BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR 1981-82
 46. The Budget for 1981-82 reflects the objectives, priorities and programmes
of the Sixth Plan. Plan outlays of the Centre, States and Union Territories in 1981-.82
wee estimated at Rs.17,479 crores compared with Rs.14,593 crores in Budget estimates
1980-81. This represents an increase of nearly 20 per cent. The Plan outlay of the
Centre for 1981-82 is being stepped up very considerably to Rs.8,619 crores from
Rs.7,340 crores in Budget estimates 1980-81, an increase of 17.4 per cent. This will
be financed by budgetary support of Rs.6,309 crores, and internal and extra budgetary
resources of Public Sector Undertakings of Rs.2310 crores. The total of the approved
Plan outlays of States and Union Territories will be Rs.8,860 crores as against Rs.7,253
crores in Budget estimates 1980-81, that is, an increase of 22 per cent. A provision of
Rs.3,462 crores has been made for Central assistance for the Plans of the States and
Union Territories.
 47. Agriculture has a preponderant role in our economy and its development
sets the pace for the economy as a whole. The Annual Plan outlay for agriculture in
the Central and State Plans has been stepped up to Rs.1,047 crores from Rs.925 crores
in Budget estimates 1980-81. Expansion of the area under irrigation is the most
important single factor enabling a shift to high productivity scientific farming.
Accordingly it is proposed to add 2.5 million hectares under irrigation in 1981-82.
The outlay for major and medium irrigation in the Annual Plan of the Centre and
States for 1981-82 is being raised substantially to Rs.1408 crores from Rs.1213 crores
in Budget 1980-81. The outlay on minor irrigation will be Rs.301 crores compared
with Rs.286 crores in 1980-81.
 48. Parallel with the effort at boosting total agricultural production, the Annual
Plan lays great stress on special programmes to benefit the weaker sections of rural
society such as landless labour small and marginal farmers, rural artisans and scheduled
castes and scheduled tribes. One of the important programmes which this Government
has launched for this purpose is the National Rural Employment Programme. We are
providing Rs.180 crores in the Central Plan for this programme and this will be matched
by an equal amount from the States.
 49. Another important initiative aimed at helping the weaker sections is the
integrated Rural Development Programme. This programme absorbs the earlier
complementary, and sometimes overlapping programmes aimed at particular sections
 9

of the population. We have provided Rs.198 crores for this programme as well as for
special programmes such as Desert Development and Drought Prone Area Programmes.
With an equivalent contribution from the States, it is expected that the integrated
Rural Development Programme will help 3 million families to go above the poverty
line in 1981-82.
 50. Central assistance for the Special Component Plans for Scheduled Castes
was introduced in the very first Budget of the present Government. We have provided
Rs.110 crores for the next year. In addition, Rs.13 crores will be invested in the
Scheduled Castes Development Corporations of States. Along with an equal contribution
from the States, this will enable these Corporations to raise substantial funds from the
financing institutions. The tribal sub-plan, which is the vehicle for the development of
tribal areas will receive an augmented provision of Rs.85 crores during 1981-82,
compared with Rs.70 crores in 1980-81. A provision of Rs.92 crores has been made
for the Special Hill Development Programme compared with Rs.61 crores in 1980-81.
 51. In pursuance of the Government’s policy to accelerate the provision of
safe drinking water in problem villages, an amount of Rs.110 crores has been allocated
in. 1981- 82. Together with the provisions made in the State Plans, this would enable
about 38, 000 additional villages to be covered during the next year.
 52. The Annual Plan accords high priority to the all important task of expanding
capacities in sectors such as oil, coal and power. It is proposed to provide Rs.580
crores for coal and lignite projects in 1981-82. This represents an increase of 31 per
cent over the provision of Rs.443 crores in 1980-81.
 53. Large increases have also been made in the outlay for power in the Central
Plan. We have provided Rs.721 crores in 1981- 82 compared to Rs.520 crores in the
last Budget. This reflects the expanding role of the Centre in the power sector. We
propose to take up the Dulhasti Project in Jammu and Kashmir and the Koel Karo
project in Bihar in the Central sector in the coming year. The total outlay for the
power sector in the State and Central Plans taken together is Rs.3326 crores compared
to Ra. 2745 crores provided in the Plan for 1980- 81. Additional generating capacity
of 3000 MW is expected to be commissioned during 1981-82. The Rural electrification
programme provides for electrification of 22,000 villages and energisation of 4.25
Iakh pumpsets in the coming year.
 54. In keeping with the high priority accorded to exploration and development
of on and natural gas resources, the Plan outlay for the petroleum sector has been
increased to Rs.1011 crores in 1981-82 compared with Rs.780 crores in the current
year. An outlay of Rs.67 crores is proposed in the petro-chemical sector.
 55. An outlay of, Rs.796 crores is being provided for steel in 1981-82. A
significant development in this area is the recent commissioning of the Demonstration
Plant for Sponge Iron Production at Kothagudem. This project is of special significance
 10

to India since the technology for production of sponge iron by using non-coking coal
will enable us to overcome the constraints imposed by the limited reserves of coking
coal in our country.
 56. The Annual Plan for 1981- 82 envisages a significantly higher outlay of
Rs. 223 crores for minerals development against Rs.130 crores in 1980-81. This includes
a provision of Rs.90 crores for the Orissa Aluminium Project which will be implemented
by the new National Aluminium Company registered with headquarters at Bhubaneswar
in Orissa. The bulk of the project cost is expected to be financed by external credit
and commercial borrowings.
 57. In tune with our concern for improving transport facilities, we have
enhanced the outlay in the Central Plan for the transport sector to Rs.1535 crores from
Ra.1351 crores in 1980-81. Hon’ble Members are already aware that a substantial
increase has been made in the Plan outlay of the Railways from Rs.760 crores in
1980-81 to Rs.980 crores. A provision of Rs.108 crores has been made for the
development of ports which includes construction of additional berths sit Kandla,
Tuticorin and Visakhapatnam.
 58. In tune with our drive to improve and modernise communication facilities.
It is proposed to extend 2 lakhs direct telephone connections during 1981-82. An
outlay of Rs.518 crores for Posts and Telegraphs including communications has been
provided in the Plan.
 59. An outlay of Rs.390 crores is being provided for chemicals and fertilisers
which includes substantial provision for the gas-based fertiliser projects at Thal Vtishet,
Hazira and Namrup. Proposals for new nitrogenous and phosphatic fertilisers plants
are also being finalised.
 60. Village and small industries have an immense potential for providing
employment while sustaining the traditional arts and skills of the village artisans and
craftsmen. An outlay of Rs.162 crores has been earmarked for these sectors adding to
the outlays of Rs.153 crores in the Plans of the States and Union Territories.
 61. Finally I cope to the an important question of population growth. All our
efforts at eradicating poverty will be frustrated if we cannot reduce the rate of population
growth. We have taken up revitalisation of the Family Welfare Programme in earnest.
A provision of Rs.155 crores is being made for this programme in 1981-82.
 62. The Government is deeply concerned about the lack of adequate
communication facilities in the North-East., We have therefore, decided to take up six
National Highways with a total length of 1700 Kms. at a total cost of Rs.70 crores. It
has also been decided to establish a more direct connection from Nowgong to Dimapur
on National Highway No. 36 at a cost of Re.16 crores. Certain missing links on the
road running along the indo-Bangladesh Border in Meghalaya will be completed at a
cost of Rs.26 crores. Railway facilities in this area are also being augmented. Hon’ble
 11

Members are aware that the Third Level Air Service has already started funtioning in
the North-Eastern Region.
 63. Non-Plan expenditure has been subjected to careful scrutiny to keep it to
the minimum. Defence expenditure is estimated at Rs.4200 crores as against Rs.3800
crores in the current year. I am sure the House will agree with me that in these difficult
times the reasonable requirements of defence should be fully met.
 64. A provision of Rs.3124 crores is being made for interest payments as
against Rs.2685 crores in the current year, the increase being mainly on account of
internal debt. Due to the increase in prices of naphtha and other inputs, the cost of
production of indigenous fertilisers has also gone up. The cost of imported fertilisers
has also increased. Accordingly, the Budget for 1981-82 provides for a higher subsidy
on fertilisers of Rs.679 crores as against Rs.468 crores in the current year.
 65. Provision for non-Plan loans to public sector undertakings has been reduced
from Rs.454 crores in the current year to Rs.318 crores in view of the anticipated
improvement in their performance and financial position in the next year. A lump sum
provision of Rs.200 crores is also being made in next year’s Budget to cover the
incidence of additional expenditure on dearness allowance to Central Government
employees. In future, dearness relief to pensioners will be paid at the rate of 2.5 per
cent of pension for each 8 point rise in the consumer price index instead of at the rate
of 5 per cent for each 16 point rise as at present. The procedure for payment of
dearness relief to pensioners is also being streamlined. These changes will mitigate
the hardships faced by pensioners.
 66. Hon’ble Members are aware that India will have the privilege of holding
the next Asian Games in 1982 in the capital. The expenditure necessary next year for
the games is being provided in the budgets of the Ministries concerned. Most of the
expenditure will be on improvement and creation of permanent assets like roads,
stadia, and other sports facilities.
 67. The total non-Plan expenditure for 1981-82 is estimated at Rs.15100 crores
compared with Rs.13736 crores in the current year.
 68. As regards receipts for 1981-82, the gross tax revenues at the existing
rates of taxation are estimated at Rs.14472 crores compared with Rs.13133 crores in
the current year, showing an increase of Rs.1339 crores over the Revised estimates.
The States’ share of taxes in 1981-82 is estimated at Rs.4206 crores compared with
Rs.3792 crores in the current year. Consequently the Centre’s net tax revenue will be
Rs.10266 crores as against Rs.9341 crores in the current year.
 69. The receipts from market loans are estimated at Rs.2800 crores compared
with Rs.2604 crores in the current year. Small savings are estimated to yield Rs.1250
crores next year compared with Rs.1100 crores in the current year. External assistance,
net of loan repayments, is estimated at Rs.1379 crores as compared with Rs.1258
 12

crores in the current year. A credit of Rs.800 crores has also been taken for receipt
from sale of Special Bearer Bonds in the next financial year.
 70. Taking into account the effect of the changes in the fare and freight rates
of railways, changes in the P&T tariff to which I will refer a little later and the
continuance of the Compulsory Deposit Scheme for income-tax Payers beyond
31.3.1981, the total receipts for 1981-82 are estimated at Rs.23061 crores. The total
expenditure for next year is estimated at Rs.24871 crores. The overall budgetary gap
at the existing rates of taxation will thus be Rs.1810 crores.
