 1




 Budget 1991-92
 Speech of
 Shri Manmohan Singh
 Minister of Finance
 24th July, 1991

 PART A


Sir,
 I rise to present the budget for 1991-92. As I rise, I am overpowered by a
strange feeling of loneliness. I miss a handsome, smiling, face listening intently to
the Budget Speech. Shri Rajiv Gandhi is no more. But his dream lives on; his
dream of ushering India into the twenty-first century; his dream of a strong, united,
technologically sophisticated but humane India. I dedicate this budget to his inspiring
memory.
 2 . The new Government, which assumed office barely a month ago, inherited
an economy in deep crisis. The balance of payments situation is precarious.
International confidence in our economy was strong until November 1989 when
our Party was in office. However, due to the combined impact of political instability
witnessed thereafter, the accentuation of fiscal imbalances and the Gulf crisis,
there was a great weakening of international confidence. There has been a sharp
decline in capital inflows through commercial borrowing and non-resident deposits.
As a result, despite large borrowings from the International Monetary Fund in July
1990 and January 1991, there was a sharp reduction in our foreign exchange
reserves. We have been at the edge of a precipice since December 1990 and more
so since April 1991. The foreign exchange crisis constitutes a serious threat to the
sustainability of growth processes and orderly implementation of our development
programmes. Due to the combination of unfavourable internal and external factors,
the inflationary pressures on the price level have increased very substantially since
mid-1990. The people of India have to face double digit inflation which hurts most
the poorer sections of our society. In sum, the crisis in the economy is both acute
and deep. We have not experienced anything similar in the history of independent
India.
 3 . The origins of the problem are directly traceable to large and persistent
macro-economic imbalances and the low productivity of investment, in particular
the poor rates of return on past investments. There has been an unsustainable
increase in Government expenditure. Budgetary subsidies, with questionable social

 1

 2
and economic impact, have been allowed to grow to an alarming extent. The tax
system still has many loopholes. It lacks transparency so that it is not easy to
assess the social and economic impact of various concessions built into its structure.
The public sector has not been managed in a manner so as to generate large
investible surpluses. The excessive and often indiscriminate protection provided to
industry has weakened the incentive to develop a vibrant export sector. It has also
accentuated disparities in income and wealth. It has worked to the disadvantage of
the rural economy. The increasing difference between the income and expenditure
of the Government has led to a widening of the gap between the income and
expenditure of the economy as a whole. This is reflected in growing current account
deficits in the balance of payments.
 4 . The crisis of the fiscal system is a cause for serious concern. The fiscal
deficit of the Central Government, which measures the difference between revenue
receipts and total expenditure, is estimated at more than 8 per cent of GDP in
1990-91, as compared with 6 per cent at the beginning of the 1980s and 4 per cent
in the mid-1970s. This fiscal deficit had to be met by borrowing. As a result,
internal public debt of the Central Government has accumulated to about 55 per
cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The burden of servicing this debt has now
become onerous. Interest payments alone are about 4 per cent of GDP and constitute
almost 20 per cent of the total expenditure of the Central Government. Without
decisive action now, the situation will move beyond the possibility of corrective
action.
 5 . The balance of payments situation is most difficult. The current account
deficit, which was about 2 per cent of GDP for several years, is estimated to be
more than 2.5 per cent of GDP in 1990-91. These persistent deficits, which were
inevitably financed by borrowings from abroad, have led to a continuous increase
in external debt which, including non-resident Indian (NRI) deposits, is estimated
at 23 per cent of GDP at the end of 1990-91. Consequently, the debt service burden
is estimated at about 21 per cent of current account receipts in 1990-91. These
strains were stretched to a breaking point on account of the Gulf crisis last year.
The balance of payments has lurched from one liquidity crisis to another since
December 1990. The current level of foreign exchange reserves, in the range of
Rs.2500 crores, would suffice to finance imports for a mere fortnight.
 6 . The price situation, which is of immediate concern to the vast mass of our
people, poses a serious problem as inflation has reached a double digit level. During
the fiscal year ending 31st March 1991 the wholesale price index registered an
increase of 12.1 per cent, while the consumer price index registered an increase of
13.6 per cent. The major worrisome feature of the inflation in 1990-91 was that it
was concentrated in essential commodities. The prices of these commodities rose
inspite of the three good monsoons in a row and hence the three successive bumper
harvests. Inflation hurts everybody, more so the poorer segments of our population
whose incomes are not indexed.
 7 . There is no time to lose. Neither the Government nor the economy can live
beyond its means year after year. The room for maneuver, to live on borrowed
money or time, does not exist any more. Any further postponement of macro-
economic adjustment, long overdue, would mean that the balance of payments
situation, now exceedingly difficult, would become unmanageable and inflation,

 3
already high, would exceed limits of tolerance. For improving the management of
the economy, the starting point, and indeed the centre-piece of our strategy, should
be a credible fiscal adjustment and macro-economic stabilisation during the current
financial year, to be followed by continued fiscal consolidation thereafter. This process
would, inevitably, need at least three years, if not longer, to complete. But there
can be no adjustment without pain. The people must be prepared to make necessary
sacrifices to preserve our economic independence and restore the health of our
economy.
 8 . In the macro-management of the economy, over the medium-term, it should
be our objective to progressively reduce the fiscal deficit of the Central Government,
to move towards a significant reduction of the revenue deficit, and to reduce the
current account deficit in the balance of payments. It is only such prudent
management that would enable us to curb the exponential growth in internal and
external debt and limit the burden on debt servicing, for the Government and the
country, to manageable levels. Indeed, we must make a conscious effort to reduce
the internal debt of the Government and the external debt of the nation, so that we
rely more and more on our own resources to finance the process of development.
During the period of transition, it shall be our endeavour to minimise the burden
of adjustment on the poor. We are committed to adjustment with a human face. It
will also be our endeavour that the adjustment process does not adversely affect
the underlying growth impulses in our economy. We do not have time to postpone
adjustment and stabilisation. We must act fast and act boldly. If we do not introduce
the needed correctives, the existing situation can only retard growth, induce recession
and fuel inflation, which would hurt the economy further and impose a far greater
burden on the poor.
 9 . Macro-economic stabilisation and fiscal adjustment alone cannot suffice.
They must be supported by essential reforms in economic policy and economic
management, as an integral part of the adjustment process, reforms which would
help to eliminate waste and inefficiency and impart a new element of dynamism to
growth processes in our economy. The thrust of the reform process would be to
increase the efficiency and international competitiveness of industrial production,
to utilise for this purpose foreign investment and foreign technology to a much
greater degree than we have done in the past, to increase the productivity of
investment, to ensure that India’s financial sector is rapidly modernised, and to
improve the performance of the public sector, so that the key sectors of our economy
are enabled to attain an adequate technological and competitive edge in a fast
changing global economy. I am confident that, after a successful implementation of
stabilisation measures and the essential structural and policy reforms, our economy
would return to a path of a high sustained growth with reasonable price stability
and greater social equity.
1 0 . Thanks to the efforts of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, Indira Gandhi and Rajiv
Gandhi, we have developed a well diversified industrial structure. This constitutes
a great asset as we begin to implement various structural reforms. However, barriers
to entry and limits on growth in the size of firms, have often led to a proliferation
of licensing and an increase in the degree of monopoly. This has put shackles on
segments of Indian industry and made them serve the interests of producers but
not pay adequate attention to the interests of consumers. There has been inadequate
emphasis on reduction of costs, upgradation of technology and improvement of

 4
quality standards. It is essential to increase the degree of competition between
firms in the domestic market so that there are adequate incentives for raising
productivity, improving efficiency and reducing costs. In the pursuit of this objective,
we have announced important changes in industrial policy which will bring about
a significant measure of deregulation in the domestic sector, consistent with our
social objectives and the binding constraints on the balance of payments.
 1 1 . The policies for industrial development are intimately related to policies
for trade. There can be no doubt that protection was essential in the initial phase
of our industrial development, so that we could go through the learning period
without disruption. The past four decades have witnessed import substitution which
has not always been efficient and has some times been indiscriminate. The time
has come to expose Indian industry to competition from abroad in a phased manner.
As a first step in this direction, the Government has introduced changes in import-
export policy, aimed at a reduction of import licensing, vigorous export promotion
and optimal import compression. The exchange rate adjustments on 1st and 3rd
July 1991 and the enlargement and liberalisation of the replenishment licence
system constitute the two major initial steps in the direction of trade policy reform.
They represent the beginning of a transition from a regime of quantitative restrictions
to a price based mechanism.
 1 2 . After four decades of planning for industrialisation, we have now reached
a stage of development where we should welcome, rather than fear, foreign
investment. Our entrepreneurs are second to none. Our industry has come of age.
Direct foreign investment would provide access to capital, technology and markets.
It would expose our industrial sector to competition from abroad in a phased
manner. Cost, efficiency, and quality would begin to receive the attention they
deserve. We have, therefore, decided to liberalise the policy regime for direct foreign
investment in the following manner. First, direct foreign investment in specified
high priority industries, with a raised limit for foreign equity at 51 per cent, would
be given prompt approval, if equity inflows are sufficient to finance the import of
capital goods at the stage of investment and if dividends are balanced by export
earnings over a period of time. Second, foreign equity upto 51 per cent would be
allowed for trading companies primarily engaged in export activities. Third, a special
board would be constituted to negotiate with a number of large international firms
and approve direct foreign investment in selected areas; this would be a special
regime to attract substantial investment that would provide access to high technology
and to world markets.
 1 3 . For the founding fathers of our Republic, a public sector that would be
vibrant, modern, competitive and capable of generating large surpluses was a vital
element in the strategy of development. The public sector has made an important
contribution to the diversification of our industrial economy. But there have been
a number of shortcomings. In particular, the public sector has not been able to
generate internal surpluses on a large enough scale. At this critical juncture, it has
therefore become necessary to take effective measures so as to make the public
sector an engine of growth rather than an absorber of national savings without
adequate return. This has been widely accepted, but thought and action in this
regard are still far apart. To bridge this gap, the portfolio of public sector investments
would be reviewed so as to concentrate the future operations of the public sector
in areas that are strategic for the nation, require high technology for the economy,

 5
and are essential for the infrastructure. In order to raise resources, encourage
wider public participation and promote greater accountability, upto 20 per cent of
government equity in selected public sector undertakings would be offered to mutual
funds and investment institutions in the public sector, as also to workers in these
firms. Public enterprises which are chronically sick and which cannot be turned
around, will be referred to the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction
(BIFR), or to a similar high-powered body to be set up, for the formulation of revival
or rehabilitation schemes; a social security mechanism will be created to fully
protect the interests of the workers likely to be affected by the rehabilitation packages
of the BIFR. Autonomy in management, and corresponding accountability, would
be provided through a system of memorandums of understanding between the
Government and public sector enterprises.
 1 4 . Our banking system and financial institutions are at the very core of the
financial infrastructure in the economy. The widening and deepening of our financial
system have helped the spread of institutional finance over a vast area and have
contributed significantly to the augmentation of our savings rate, particularly
financial savings. This has been a most commendable achievement, but our financial
system has developed certain rigidities and some weaknesses which we must address
now . The objective of reform in the financial sector would be to preserve its basic
role as an essential adjunct to economic growth and competitive efficiency, while
improving the health of its institutions. In this task, it is essential to ensure capital
adequacy, introduce prudential norms and improve profitability of our commercial
banks and financial institutions. There are no magic solutions. These are complex
issues which need careful consideration. Therefore, I propose to appoint a high
level committee to consider all relevant aspects of structure, organisation, functions
and procedures of the financial system. This committee would advise the Government
on appropriate measures that would be needed to enhance the viability and health
of our financial sector so that it can better serve the needs of the economy without
any sacrifice of the canons and principles of a sound financial system.
 1 5 . Interest rates are a crucial dimension of the financial sector. In the formative
stages of the development of credit markets, administrative intervention in interest
rates is both necessary and desirable. At the present stage of our development,
however, we can begin to relax the degree of intervention and impart a greater
flexibility to the structure of interest rates. The Reserve Bank of India has already
taken an important step in this direction, by stipulating a floor rate of interest and
providing freedom to commercial banks to charge interest rates above the floor
level based on their perceptions of risk. The Government proposes to extend a
similar freedom to term-lending financial institutions, where the minimum interest
rate would be 15 per cent, and these institutions would be free to charge an
interest rate in accordance with their perception of the creditworthiness of borrowers.
With the exception of tax free bonds for the public sector, it is also proposed to
remove all restrictions on interest rates for debentures, both convertible and non-
convertible, floated in the capital market. The interest rate on such debt instruments
will hereafter be governed by market forces, and the credit rating of such debt
instruments will become an integral part of the capital market process. In
consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, the Government would continue to
watch the structure of interest rates. Recently, interest rates payable on bank
deposits have been increased. I now propose to do a similar thing with regard to

 6
interest rates payable under the small savings schemes. Our ultimate objective is
to achieve a significant reduction both in the nominal and the real interest rates.
This would be possible if the rate of inflation is reduced significantly over the next
three years.
 1 6 . While presenting the budget for 1987-88, our former Prime Minister the
late Shri Rajiv Gandhi had assured this House that for a healthy growth of capital
markets, for protecting the rights of investors and for preventing trading malpractices
the Government would set up a separate Board for the regulation and orderly
functioning of the Stock Exchanges and the securities industry. Although the Board
was set up, legislation to give the Board adequate powers was unfortunately not
enacted. This shall now be done forthwith and full statutory powers will be given to
the Securities and Exchange Board of India for administering the relevant provisions
of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act and the Companies Act. Transferring
these powers from the Controller of Capital Issues and the Government to an
independent body would enable it to effectively regulate, promote and monitor the
working of the Stock Exchanges in the country. A comprehensive package of reforms
relating to trading on the Stock Exchanges, including a system of national clearing
and settlement and setting up of a central depository, is also under active
consideration.
 1 7 . In regard to Mutual Funds, some progress towards evolving a competitive
structure has been made in the last few years with encouraging results. For many
investors, mutual funds are a more suitable investment vehicle than direct ownership
of shares. The Government is already giving tax incentives for equity-linked savings
schemes offered through mutual funds. The Government has now decided to further
promote the development of mutual funds by throwing the field open to the private
sector and joint sector mutual funds. In order to safeguard the interests of the
investing public, and to encourage a healthy growth of the capital markets, a
comprehensive set of guidelines is being evolved for the operation of all mutual
funds. Consideration will also be given to enactment of legislation for this purpose.
 1 8 . A comprehensive review of policies and procedures bearing on Non-resident
Indian investments shall be carried out and further relaxations made in order to
remove all procedural difficulties and impediments to the setting up of industrial
and other ventures by Non-resident Indians. New sectors shall be made available
to NRIs for investment on a non-repatriation basis, including housing, infrastructure
and real estate development. For example, at present, NRIs of foreign nationality
are required to obtain specific permission under section 31 of the Foreign Exchange
Regulation Act (FERA) to acquire residential property. It is now proposed to provide
general exemption from this provision to such persons. However, rental income
and proceeds from the sale of such housing will be non-repatriable. For facilitating
interaction with the Central Government, to serve as a focal point for NRIs,
Government proposes to establish a Chief Commissioner for Non-resident Indians.
I would urge State Governments, also, to establish an office of a Commissioner for
Non-Resident Indians.
 1 9 . I believe that the time has come to evolve a more transparent institutional
mechanism for fixing tariffs and domestic prices in sectors where there might still
be need for protecting Indian industry against foreign competition and for the
determination of administered prices, particularly in the area of public utilities. For

 7
this purpose, we propose to restructure the Bureau of Industrial Costs and Prices
and to transform it into a Tariff Commission.
 2 0 . As we enter the last decade of the twentieth century, India stands at the
cross-roads. The decisions we take and do not take, at this juncture, will determine
the shape of things to come for quite some time. It should come as no surprise,
therefore, that an intense debate rages throughout the country as to the path we
should adopt. In a democratic society it could not be otherwise. What can we learn
from this debate? The most important thing that comes out clearly is that we
cannot realise our goal of establishing a just society, if we abandon the planning
process. But India’s future development depends crucially on how well the planning
process is adapted to the needs of a fast changing situation. I believe that without
an intelligent and systematic coordinated resource use in some major sectors of
our economy, development will be lopsided. It will violate deeply cherished values
of equity and it will keep India well below its social, intellectual and moral potential.
But our planning processes must be sensitive to the needs of a dynamic economy.
Over centralisation and excessive bureaucratisation of economic processes have
proved to be counter productive. We need to expand the scope and the area for the
operation of market forces. A reformed price system can be a superior instrument
of resource allocation than quantitative controls. But markets can only serve those
who are part of the market system. A vast number of people in our country live on
the edges of a subsistence economy. We need credible programmes of direct
government intervention focussing on the needs of these people. We have the
responsibility to provide them with quality social services such as education, health,
safe drinking water and roads. In the same way, the development of capital and
technology intensive sectors, characterised by long gestation periods, such as
transport and communications and energy will need to be planned with much
greater care than ever before. The control of land and water degradation, which
threatens the livelihood of millions of poor people in this country, will also require
effective Government leadership and action.
 2 1 . The challenge that we are facing is without precedent. In its initial stages,
the Industrial Revolution in the western world concentrated on the creation of
wealth, unmindful of the social misery and inequity which characterised this process.
The democratisation of the polity came much later. The socialist experiment in
charting a new path for accelerated industrial transformation of an underdeveloped
economy and polity did achieve considerable success in developing technological
and military capabilities, accumulation of capital for rapid industrial growth and
human resources development, in countries such as the USSR. But recent
developments have shown that this approach too suffered from major weaknesses,
particularly in its allocative efficiency, in the management of technical change,
control of environmental degradation and in harnessing the vast latent energy and
talents of individuals. In India, we launched an experiment under the leadership of
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, an experiment which sought to unite the strengths and
merits of different approaches to accelerated development of our backward economy.
We have achieved considerable success in the field of development, modernisation
and greater social equity. However, we are yet far from realising our full potential
in all these areas. We have to accomplish the unfinished task, while remaining
steadfast in our allegiance to the values of a democratic system.
 2 2 . At the same time, we must restore to the creation of wealth its proper

 8
place in the development process. For, without it, we cannot remove the stigma of
abject poverty, ignorance and disease. But we cannot accept social misery and
inequity as unavoidable in the process of creation of wealth. The basic challenge of
our times is to ensure that wealth creation is not only tempered by equity and
justice but is harnessed to the goal of removal of poverty and development for all.
 2 3 . For the creation of wealth, we must encourage accumulation of capital.
This will inevitably mean a regime of austerity. We have also to remove the stumbling
blocks from the path of those who are creating wealth. At the same time, we have
to develop a new attitude towards wealth. In the ultimate analysis, all wealth is a
social product. Those who create it and own it, have to hold it as a trust and use
it in the interest of the society, and particularly of those who are under-privileged
and without means. Years ago, Gandhiji expounded the philosophy of trusteeship.
This philosophy should be our guiding star. The austerity that Gandhiji practised
and preached is a necessary condition for accelerated economic development in the
framework of a democratic polity. The trusteeship that he prescribed for the owners
of wealth captured the idea of social responsibility.
 2 4 . In highlighting the significance of reform, my purpose is not to give a fillip
to mindless and heartless consumerism we have borrowed from the affluent societies
of the West. My objection to the consumerist phenomenon is two-fold. First, we
cannot afford it. In a society where we lack drinking water, education, health,
shelter and other basic necessities, it would be tragic if our productive resources
were to be devoted largely to the satisfaction of the needs of a small minority. The
country’s needs for water, for drinking and for irrigation, rural roads, good urban
infrastructure, and massive investments in primary education and basic health
services for the poor are so great as to effectively preclude encouragement to
consumerist behaviour imitative of advanced industrial societies. Our approach to
development has to combine efficiency with austerity. Austerity not in the sense of
negation of life or a dry, arid creed that casts a baleful eye on joy and laughter. To
my mind, austerity is a way of holding our society together in pursuit of the noble
goal of banishing poverty, hunger and disease from this ancient land of ours.
 2 5 . Let me now turn to fiscal adjustment during the current financial year.
The beginning of any attempt to correct the fiscal imbalance in the economy must
be directed at a reduction in expenditure and an increase in income of the
Government, so as to reduce the fiscal deficit. In the medium-term, however, our
fiscal regime would be sustainable only if revenue receipts not only meet revenue
expenditure but also provide a sufficient surplus to finance capital expenditure
that does not yield direct economic returns as such, as in defence or in social
sectors. Even this would not suffice if investment expenditures in the budget do
not earn an adequate return. The elimination of structural imbalances in our fiscal
system would require a reduction both in the fiscal deficit and in the revenue
deficit as a proportion of GDP. The Union Budget for 1991-92 is an essential first
step in this direction.
 2 6 . It must be recognised that the necessary reduction in the fiscal deficit,
during 1991-92, is a stupendous task. The interim budget presented to Parliament
in March 1991 estimated the fiscal deficit at Rs.38475 crores. But this estimate
was based on assumptions about certain decisions that have not been implemented.
The postponement of the regular budget has made a formidable task even more
difficult because almost four months of the financial year have now elapsed without

 9
any effort at fiscal correction. Indeed, past trends in revenue and expenditure
suggest that, without any corrective action on our part, the fiscal deficit during
1991-92 could well reach a level of more than Rs.52000 crores. The difference
between the two sets of figures provides the real measure of the fiscal correction
needed during the current financial year.
 2 7 . According to provisional data available, the more narrowly defined budget
deficit, as measured by borrowing through short term Treasury bills, for 1990-91
at Rs.11430 crores was significantly higher than the revised estimate of Rs.10722
crores, largely due to a substantial revenue shortfall, particularly in corporation
tax revenues. This highlights the handicap with which we begin. Let me now present
the scenario for 1991-92.
 2 8 . The increasing levels of non-plan expenditure, financed through borrowing,
have led to an exponential increase in interest payments by the Government. The
revised estimates for interest payments during 1990-91, at Rs.21850 crores,
accounted for as much as 38 per cent of the net revenue receipts of the Central
Government. Interest payments during 1991-92, estimated at Rs.27450 crores,
constitute 42 per cent of the net revenue receipts of the Central Government at
existing rates of taxation. If the present trends continue without any correction,
then interest payments could well account for more than 50 per cent of the net
revenue receipts of the Central Government by 1994-95. These magnitudes and
proportions only serve to highlight the gravity of the situation and the acute need
for a substantial adjustment in non-plan expenditure over the next three years.
 2 9 . The revised estimate for total non-plan expenditure in 1990-91 was
Rs.76761 crores. In the normal course, even with the strictest scrutiny but in the
absence of specific measures for reducing expenditure, this non-plan expenditure
would have increased to a level of Rs.89000 crores in 1991-92. Any attempt at
fiscal correction during the current financial year can be meaningful only if non-
plan expenditure is reduced by at least 10 per cent from the level it would otherwise
reach.
 3 0 . The single largest component of non-plan expenditure is interest payments.
Even if there is a drastic reduction in Government borrowing during this year,
interest payments would still be in the range of Rs.35000 crores in the next financial
year. The exponential increase in interest payments can be brought under some
measure of control, by 1994-95, only through a strict discipline on government
borrowing for a period of three years.
 3 1 . The second largest component of non-plan expenditure is the allocation
for the defence sector, where the provision in the revised estimates for 1990-91 was
Rs.15750 crores. No attempt at containing non-plan expenditure can succeed if
defence is to be excluded. At the same time, it is absolutely essential to ensure that
a quest for economy in expenditure does not in any way compromise national
security. We must, therefore, seek to limit expenditure without diluting the efficiency
and effectiveness of our defence services. Keeping in view all these considerations,
it has been decided to provide an outlay of Rs.16350 crores for defence in the
current year.
 3 2 . Honourable Members are aware that export subsidies have been abolished
with effect from 3 July 1991. The export sector is being adequately compensated
through the adjustments in the exchange rate and the expansion of the
Replenishment Licensing System which were implemented at the beginning of July.

 10
Consequently, it is now necessary to provide only Rs.1224 crores for export subsidies
in the budget estimates for 1991-92, as compared with the earlier estimated
requirement of Rs.4200 crores, yielding a saving of as much as Rs.3000 crores
during the remainder of this year.
 3 3 . In so far as fertiliser subsidies are concerned, with effect from this evening,
low analysis fertilisers such as calcium ammonium nitrate, ammonium chloride,
ammonium sulphate and sulphate of potash will be free from price and movement
controls. There will be an increase of 40 per cent, on an average, in the price of all
other fertilisers. In addition, in respect of single super phosphate, there shall also
be a ceiling on the subsidy per tonne payable to producers so as to move towards
total deregulation in the next few years; this should act as an incentive for all high
cost units to reduce costs and improve efficiency. The necessary notifications in
this regard are being issued separately, today, by the Ministry of Agriculture.
 3 4 . The economic rationale for an increase in the price of fertilisers is so
obvious that it does not need to be stated. Nevertheless, I would like to draw the
attention of the House to the fact that there has been no increase in fertiliser prices
since July 1981. In these ten years, there has been a continuous increase in the
procurement prices of paddy and wheat, as also in the market prices of other
crops, received by the agricultural sector. Farmers will be compensated for the
proposed increase in the price of fertilisers through suitable increases in procurement
prices.
 3 5 . We would continue to ensure that 50 per cent of the plan resources are
invested in the agricultural and rural sector. The provision for the continuing schemes
for assistance to small and marginal farmers for dug wells and shallow tubewells
would be doubled. The ceilings on assistance in difficult areas, where the water-
table is very low, would be removed. Similarly, the provision for assistance for fresh
water and brackish water aqua-culture and for oilseeds and pulses production
would be substantially stepped up. New schemes are being drawn up to popularise
small tractors and matching implements, drip and sprinkler irrigation in areas
where water is scarce, and quality seeds in low yield areas. Another new scheme
that would be implemented from this kharif season is for providing assistance to
State Governments, cooperative societies, and farmers’ groups to provide blanket
plant protection cover on payment of a small fee in large identified areas under
cotton or pulses. It would also be possible to demonstrate the advantages of
integrated pest management in these areas. In order to safeguard any possible loss
in production because of increase in fertiliser prices, and any decline in consumption,
the credit structure would be strengthened to ensure adequate availability of credit
particularly to the small and marginal farmers. Simultaneously, soil testing
laboratories and farm advisory services all over the country would be strengthened
to ensure efficient use of fertilisers and popularise the use of bio-fertilisers. We
would also identify a few irrigation projects that can be completed in this very year
and ensure that these are provided the necessary funds. The other new initiatives,
also, would not be starved of funds. As far as possible our emphasis will be on
provision of quality services to our farmers and not on hand outs and subsidies.
 3 6 . The sugar subsidy which is costing the exchequer about Rs.350 crores
per annum is indeed an aberration, which crept into the system from January
1990, when the increase in the levy price paid to producers was not matched by a
simultaneous increase in the issue price for consumers in the public distribution
system. Small quantities of sugar are made available, mostly in metropolitan and

 11
urban areas, under the public distribution system at Rs.5.25 per kg. whereas the
price that most people pay in the market is around Rs.10 per kg. Government has
decided that this subsidy should be abolished forthwith. Consequently, the issue
price of sugar under the public distribution system will be increased by 85 paise
per kg. to Rs.6.10 per kg. with effect from this evening. At the same time, the
public distribution system is being strengthened to serve more effectively the weaker
sections of our population, particularly the rural poor, having special regard to
their basic needs for foodgrains such as rice and wheat. The provision for food
subsidies in the current year is being stepped up to Rs.2600 crores, as compared
with only Rs.1800 crores provided in the interim budget and Rs.2450 crores provided
in the revised estimates for 1990-91.
 3 7 . As a result of the exchange rate adjustments, at the beginning of July
1991, there would be an increase in the rupee value of the import bill for crude oil
and petroleum products. It is, therefore, necessary to raise the prices of petroleum
products for domestic consumers. This would also help to restrain the growth in
consumption of petroleum products. The price of motor spirit, domestic LPG and
aviation turbine fuel for domestic use would be raised by 20 per cent. The prices of
other petroleum products, excluding diesel and kerosene for non-industrial
use,would be raised by 10 per cent. The price of kerosene, for non-industrial use,
would be reduced by 10 per cent which means a 50 per cent roll-back in relation
to the increase in the price that came into effect on 15 October 1990. Even in a
most difficult financial situation, this is being done to protect the poor for whom
kerosene is an essential source of light and fuel. While there will be no increase in
the price of diesel, I would endeavour to protect the interests of the farmers who
use diesel. For this purpose, I shall hold discussions with State Governments. The
proposed increases in the prices of petroleum products will come into effect from
this evening, and the necessary notification in this regard is being separately issued
by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.
 3 8 . For non-plan expenditure, excluding interest payments, defence, and major
subsidies, the total provision in the budget estimates for 1991-92 is Rs. 28,073
crores, reflecting a reduction of Rs. 1538 crores compared with the provision in the
revised estimates for 1990-91. If we take into account the fact that no separate
provision has been made for the payment of additional installments of dearness
allowance by Ministries and Departments in the current year, the total reduction in
such other non-plan expenditure will exceed Rs. 2000 crores. In recent years, it
has been the usual practice to issue instructions to Ministries that such additional
requirements should be accommodated within the approved budget estimates. This
has invariably resulted in some programmes on the plan side being deprived of
adequate resources. It is my intention to effect maximum possible economies in the
non-plan administrative expenditure. Therefore, all Ministries have been requested
to prioritise their activities so that those which figure at the bottom of the list can
be abridged, while those which have outlived their utility can be abandoned
altogether. This exercise has already been initiated by all Ministries and is expected
to be completed by the end of August 1991. With this approach, the proposed
reduction in other non-plan expenditure, which I am promising to the House,
would be brought about in a more meaningful manner without leading to a reduction
in the provision for plan programmes.
 3 9 . There is one large component of non-plan expenditure that is a burden on

 12
the exchequer. I refer to the Government’s obligation under the Rural Debt Relief
Scheme. Unfortunately, there was a gross under-estimation of the total fiscal liability
under this scheme which was introduced last year. In addition to the sum of Rs.
1500 crores provided in the revised estimates for last year, we have to provide Rs.
1500 crores in the current year. But this is not all. We may need a similar provision
in the next year.
 4 0 . As a result of the major adjustments in the sphere of expenditure, which
I have outlined in my speech, the budget estimate for total non-plan expenditure in
1991-92 stands at Rs. 79,697 crores. It is simply not possible to reduce interest
payments in the short term. The provision for non-plan expenditure, excluding
interest payments, in the current year represents a reduction of 4.9 per cent
compared with the provisions in the revised estimates for 1990-91, and a reduction
of almost 15 per cent in relation to what we would have had to provide this year,
but for the specific correctives that are being introduced. We have, thus, more than
fulfilled our commitment to reduce non-plan expenditure by 10 per cent, which
was stated in our Party’s election manifesto.
 4 1 . The election manifesto of the Congress Party identifies areas for special
emphasis in our strategy of development. These include a substantial augmentation
of employment programmes, the construction of dwelling units for the weaker
sections of our society, an expansion of the programme for irrigation wells and so
on. This would need a change in, and some reorientation of, plan priorities, with a
shift towards investment in rural areas and expenditure on programmes designed
for the benefit of the poor. Our strategy would, of course, be reflected in the Eighth
Five Year Plan, which would now commence on 1 April 1992. It shall be our
endeavour to finalise the Eighth Plan document by the end of this calendar year, so
that the annual plans for 1992-93, as well as the budgets of the Centre and the
States for that year, reflect the changed priorities.
 4 2 . As the Vote on Account had earlier been taken only to cover the expenditure
in the first four months, this budget has had to be presented before the end of
July, 1991. We have, thus, not had the time to re-orient the Annual Plan for 1991-
92 to reflect fully our various concerns. Moreover, this year ’s annual plan has had
to be situated in the context of the massive fiscal correction that we have to put
through. In fact, it was first felt that it would be necessary to effect a substantial
reduction in budget support for the Central Plan and Central Plan assistance for
the States. I am, however, happy to inform the House that with the substantial
cuts proposed in non-plan expenditure, it is now possible to protect the flow of
Central Plan assistance to States and Union Territories at the level of Rs. 14710
crores, as reflected in the interim budget for 1991-92. The Central plan outlay
would, however, show a modest increase at Rs. 42969 crores with a budget support
of Rs. 19015 crores.
 4 3 . I am aware that in basic infrastructure areas such as power, coal,
communications and petroleum, we will have to set our sights much higher. In the
present situation, characterised by an acute shortage of foreign exchange, it is, in
particular, imperative to augment substantially the domestic production of coal,
crude oil, natural gas and electrical energy. Efforts will also have to be made on a
crash basis for promoting utmost economy in use of energy through more efficient
technologies in industry, agriculture, transport and domestic sectors. The

 13
transmission and distribution line losses would also have to be brought down
drastically from the present high level of 22 per cent. We shall address ourselves to
all these tasks once we are through with taking stock of the situation. It is my
earnest hope that, by then, thanks to the fiscal corrections now being put through,
the resources position would improve, giving us the necessary flexibility. For the
present, it has been my endeavour to maintain essential investment through
appropriate support for the Central Plan despite binding constraints on the
e x c h e q u e r.
 4 4 . In preparing this budget, I have sought to ensure that the burden of fiscal
adjustment does not fall on State Governments. It is my belief that the Central
Government must set an example by introducing fiscal correctives, and it is my
hope that the State Governments would move in this direction as soon as possible.
In particular, I would urge them to ensure prompt payment of dues owed by the
State Electricity Boards to the National Thermal Power Corporation, Coal India and
the Indian Railways. We cannot allow State level enterprises to become an instrument
of unplanned and unauthorised transfer of resources from the Centre to the States.
That is neither fair nor equitable. This practice must, therefore, stop forthwith.
Simultaneously, State Governments must take effective steps to improve their fiscal
performance and streamline the working of their public enterprises. They should
not expect me to reward fiscal laxity by permitting them to have recourse to
unauthorised overdrafts from the Reserve Bank of India. I want them to be an
active partner in the accomplishment of the difficult task of restoring the fiscal
health of the country.
 4 5 . The process of macro-economic adjustment, which is being initiated with
this budget, would take at least three years to complete. This adjustment must
have a human face. Therefore, during the period of transition, we shall do everything
that is possible to minimise the burden of adjustment on the poor. To some extent,
the poor would be protected as the rate of inflation comes down. We shall make
determined efforts to control inflation and the price rise. The fiscal strategy of this
budget will make a major contribution in this regard. In addition, it will be our
endeavour to provide protection to the poor in the form of enhanced outlays in the
social sectors. Employment creation and poverty eradication in rural India will
continue to receive the highest priority. At the same time, Government is committed
to the uplift of the weakest and the most vulnerable sections of our society.
 4 6 . The plan outlay for the Ministry of Rural Development is being stepped up
from Rs.3115 crores last year to Rs. 3508 crores this year. Within this, the outlay
for employment programmes alone is Rs.2100 crores. The various employment
oriented programmes should make it possible to provide nearly 900 million man-
days of employment. If, this year, we are not aiming at the target of 1000 million
man-days mentioned in our manifesto it is because the season when there is
maximum need for such employment is already over. The Eighth Plan now under
formulation will spell out a comprehensive strategy and programmes to achieve the
long term employment objectives, and targets such as those relating to the
construction of irrigation wells, urban night shelters and Sulabh Shauchalayas,
dwelling units for poor backward classes, scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in
the villages, mentioned in our Party’s election manifesto.
 4 7 . The provision for the rural water supply scheme is being stepped up to
Rs.758 crores, so as to make it possible to set aside Rs. 250 crores for ensuring

 14
complete coverage of ‘no-source problem villages’ by the end of 1992-93. The earlier
expectation was that these villages would be covered only by the end of the Eighth
Plan period. The late Shri Rajiv Gandhi had attached great priority to this programme
and had set up a Technology Mission for this purpose. The programme, which is
now being named after Shri Rajiv Gandhi, will be accelerated. We will ensure that
resource constraints do not stand in the way of achieving the target.
 4 8 . It is a matter of deep concern that we have still not been able to put an
end to the dehumanising practice of manual removal of night-soil. The allocation
for this programme has in the past been less than adequate. It has now been
decided not only to accelerate the programme for the conversion of dry-latrines
but also to step up the allocation for the rehabilitation and retraining of scavengers.
Towards this end, the allocation for the programme has been increased by Rs. 25
crores and more funds, to the extent necessary, would be provided during the
course of the year. Inclusive of the increased provision for this programme, the
total outlay for the programmes of the Ministry of Welfare, which is concerned
with the welfare of scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and other weaker sections
of our society, is being stepped up from Rs. 364 crores in 1990-91 to Rs. 479
crores in 1991-92. The outlay for the Department of Women and Child
Development, dealing with perhaps the two most disadvantaged segments of our
population among the poor, is being enhanced from Rs. 330 crores last year to
Rs. 400 crores this year. For Health and Family Welfare, I am providing a plan
outlay of Rs. 1051 crores in 1991-92 as compared with Rs. 950 crores in 1990-
91.
 4 9 . The allocation of resources for investment in social sectors is of utmost
importance for the development of human resources. In this context, there is no
need for me to emphasise the importance of education, in particular, elementary
education. Our efforts to restructure and revitalise the economy can succeed only
if we invest in our people. Particular attention has to be paid to the provision of
quality education to children belonging to the scheduled castes, the scheduled
tribes and other economically and socially backward classes. Children who belong
to the category of first generation learners need special care and attention. If the
equality of opportunity is to acquire its true significance, quality education must
not remain the exclusive privilege of the children of the rich. The Government is
committed to ensure that, whatever be our constraints, the programmes of education
will not be allowed to suffer for want of financial support. Every effort will be made
to ensure that the constitutional directive of providing free and compulsory education
upto the age of 14 years becomes a reality before we enter the twenty first century.
In the sphere of higher education and technical education, more resources are
needed for modernisation and diversification, but, at the same time, an effort must
be made to secure optimum results from the existing investments in these
institutions. The requirements of education are vast and we shall have to seek
innovative ways of finding resources. Budget support provided by the Central
Government and the State Governments are an important source, but cannot
continue to remain the only source. I am raising the allocation for education from
Rs.865 crores in 1990-91 to Rs.977 crores in 1991-92. This allocation is not
commensurate with my deep commitment to education and the priority that is
attached by the Government to the education sector. I would have liked to do more
but we must learn to live with the constraints on the exchequer.

 15
 5 0 . We have the third largest number of scientists and technologists in the
world. Yet, technology development in our country has not been commensurate
either with this number or the investments that we have been making in the
science and technology sectors in our successive Five Year Plans. This gap would
have to be bridged through a suitable reorientation of the Science and Technology
Policy and the way paved for relating science and technology more intimately to the
requirements of our development, as well as for better upgradation, absorption,
adaptation and assimilation of new technologies. This task has become imperative
as we prepare ourselves to be an internationally competitive economy.
 5 1 . Government has also decided on five new initiatives. The first of these is
the establishment of a Corporation for the welfare of the backward classes, a task
that the Congress manifesto has included for completion within the first 100 days.
The details of the structure and duties of this Corporation are being finalised by
the Ministry of Welfare and will be announced before the end of this session.
 5 2 . Government will establish a National Renewal Fund, with a substantial
corpus. The main objective of this fund will be to ensure that the cost of technical
change and modernisation of the productive apparatus does not devolve on the
workers. This fund will provide a social safety net which will protect the workers
from the adverse consequences of the technological transformation. I visualise that
this fund will grow in size and State governments will also contribute to its corpus
in due course. The fund will not merely provide ameliorative measures for the
workers affected in the course of technical change but, more importantly, provide
retraining to them, so that they are in a position to remain active productive partners
in the process of modernisation.
 5 3 . The third programme relates to the care of children of families affected by
communal riots. These riots are a blot on the fair name of our Republic. Our
Government is deeply committed to the protection and advancement of all religious
and cultural minorities. Effective steps will be taken to prevent recurrence of
communal violence. At present there are arrangements to provide compensation of
varying amounts to the riot affected families. But experience shows that such
compensation does not always protect the interests of children of the riot affected
families. These children then grow up into disgruntled and disorganised adulthood.
They become an easy prey to the propaganda of anti-social elements and the
obscurantist, fundamentalist forces of reaction. To protect the interests of such
children, look after their welfare and in particular their education, the Government
proposes to set up a National Foundation for Communal Harmony as an autonomous
non- government organisation. The Central Government will make a significant
contribution to this Foundation in 1991-92. I invite State Governments as well as
industry and trade to make liberal contributions for this noble cause.
 5 4 . The fourth programme is to promote national integration through a scheme
for enabling the youth of each part of the country to go in large numbers and work
for short periods in other parts of the country, giving them an opportunity to
mingle with people of different regions and languages. A similar step in this direction
has already been taken in the Navodaya Vidyalaya Programme. This will now be
strengthened and extended on a national basis.
 5 5 . The fifth programme relates to promotion of South-South cooperation. We

 16
as a nation are committed to close cooperation and sharing our development
experience, knowledge and expertise with non-aligned and other developing countries.
There is immense scope for Indian scientists, technicians, engineers, teachers,
social workers and farmers to contribute to the development process in the third
world. Our experience in various fields can be of great relevance and assistance to
many developing countries particularly in Asia and Africa. It is our hope to arrange
for participation of at least 500 volunteers in different nation building tasks, in
selected developing countries, in the coming year. The details of the programmes
will be worked out and announced before the end of the session.
 5 6 . The House will also be pleased to learn that in acceptance of a
recommendation of the South Commission presided over by Dr. Julius K. Nyerere,
the former President of Tanzania, we propose to set up a National Committee under
the chairmanship of the Prime Minister for mobilising public opinion in support of
South-South cooperation and for advising our Government for devising concrete
action programmes in this regard. This committee will consist of representatives of
Government, trade and industry, trade unions and members of learned professions.
 5 7 . The Rajiv Gandhi Foundation has been established to perpetuate the
memory of the great leader and to promote the ideals and objectives for which he
lived and laid down his life. This Foundation, among other things, will lay particular
emphasis on research and action programmes relating to the application of science
and technology for development, propagation of literacy, the protection of the
environment, the promotion of communal harmony and national integration, the
uplift of the under-privileged, women and handicapped persons, administrative
reforms and India’s role in the global economy. As a homage to the late Shri Rajiv
Gandhi and in support of the laudable objectives of the Foundation, Government
has decided to contribute Rs.100 crores to the Foundation at the rate of Rs.20
crores per annum for a period of five years beginning from the current year.
 5 8 . Pending determination of the exact amounts that will be necessary for
each of these new initiatives, a lump sum provision of Rs.250 crores has been
included in the plan outlay of the Ministry of Finance.
 5 9 . The budget provision for total expenditure in 1991-92 is Rs.113422 crores,
of which Rs.79697 crores is non-plan expenditure and Rs.33725 crores is plan
expenditure.
 6 0 . In the sphere of revenue receipts, at the existing rates of taxation, gross
tax revenues are estimated at Rs.66218 crores during the current financial year,
compared to Rs.58916 crores in the revised estimates of last year. The payment to
States of their share of taxes is placed at Rs.15643 crores in 1991-92 as against
Rs.14535 crores in the revised estimates for 1990-91. Thus, the net revenue receipts
of the Centre, including non-tax revenue, are estimated to increase from Rs.57381
crores in 1990-91 to Rs.65524 crores in 1991-92.
 6 1 . In the sphere of capital receipts, market borrowings are placed at Rs.7500
crores this year, which is lower than Rs.8000 crores last year; this is part of a
conscious effort to reduce the borrowing of the Central Government which would,
in keeping with the past trends, have gone up by about 10 per cent. The net
collections on account of small savings are estimated at Rs.8000 crores, which are
at the same level as the revised estimates for last year. In addition, the Government

 17
has decided to disinvest upto 20 per cent of its equity in selected public sector
undertakings in favour of mutual funds and investment institutions in the public
sector, which is expected to yield Rs.2500 crores to the exchequer during the
current financial year. This disinvestment would broad-base the equity, improve
the management and enhance the availability of resources in these enterprises.
 6 2 . The net receipts on account of external assistance, excluding grants, are
placed at Rs.3510 crores compared to Rs.3984 crores in the revised estimates of
1990-91. While the increase in the loan repayment and interest payment liabilities,
as a consequence of the recent exchange rate adjustments, is fully reflected in the
budget estimates, the likely increase in the rupee value of external assistance
following the exchange rate adjustments is still under assessment. To the extent
that these receipts increase, there will also be a corresponding increase in
expenditure when the assistance is passed on to the concerned projects or schemes
for which such assistance is received. These changes, which will thus be budget
deficit neutral, will be incorporated at the stage of revised estimates.
 6 3 . Taking into account other changes in receipts and expenditure, total
receipts at the existing rates of taxation are estimated at Rs.103698 crores, while
total expenditure is estimated at Rs.113422 crores. Therefore, without additional
resource mobilisation, the budget deficit is estimated at Rs.9724 crores, the revenue
deficit at Rs.15859 crores, and the fiscal deficit at Rs.39732 crores.


