 SPEECH OF SHRIMATI INDIRA GANDHI PRIME MINISTER AND
MINISTER OF FINANCE INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR
 1970-71
 Sir,
 I rise to present the Budget for the year 1970-71. The annual Budget is the most
important instrument through which we implement our successive Plans for
development.
 2. Before I proceed to delineate the broad features of our present economic
situation and of the Budget, I should like to spell out briefly the main. ingredients of
Government’s approach.
 3. It is generally accepted that social, economic and political stability is not
possible without the growth of productive forces and the augmentation of national
wealth. Also, that such growth and increase in wealth cannot be sustained without due
regard to the welfare of the weaker sections of the community.
 4. Therefore, it is necessary to devise policies which reconcile the imperatives
of growth with concern for the well-being of the needy and the poor. Measures have
to be devised which, while providing welfare, also add momentum to productive forces.
Any severance of the vital link between the needs of growth and of distributive justice
will produce stagnation or instability. Both must be avoided.
 5. The provision of adequate employment opportunities is not just a welfare
measure. It is a necessary part of the strategy of development in a poor country which
can ill-afford to keep any resources unutilised or under-utilised. Greater attention to
dry farming areas is not merely to avoid inequalities in the rural areas. It is also an
essential part of any programme to achieve sustained increases in agricultural
production. Encouragement to small enterprises and to new entrepreneurs is vital to
build up managerial and entrepreneurial talent which is all too scarce today. Without
some restraint on urban land values and individual ownership of urban property, we
cannot adequately develop housing and other amenities necessary to wrest the maximum
benefit from the vast productive investments already made in our over-crowded towns
and cities. The weaker sections of the society are also the greatest source of potential
strength. We cannot provide for all the urgent needs of society with our limited
resources. But a balance has to be struck between outlays which may be immediately
productive and those which are essential to create and sustain a social and political
framework which is conducive to growth, in the long.
 6. Economic conditions in the country at present permit and indeed require
a more vigorous effort to stimulate growth. During 1969-70, the first year of the
 1

Fourth Plan, there is every likely hood of achieving an over-all rate of growth of 5 to
51/2 per cent. The modernisation of Indian agriculture is well on its way; and it has led
to a substantial recovery in industrial production. There has been a welcome increase
in foreign exchange reserves; and the general level of prices over the past two years
has been relatively stable. At the same time, it is necessary to set up new capacity in
a number of fields in order to sustain growing levels of consumption, exports and
employment.
 7. If the opportunities for growth, which are now available, are to be seized
fully, the Central and State Governments must make adequate provision for
developmental outlays in the coming year. Private investment in agriculture, small
industry and construction has been buoyant for some time now; and there is a revival
of interest in investment in organised industry. A decisive increase in Plan outlay in
the public sector will also stimulate productive investment in the private sector.
 8. Apart from providing for a significantly higher Plan outlay, the Budget
for 1970-71 makes special provision for a number of schemes which combine an
element of social welfare with future growth potential.
 9. It is with this positive approach to problems of growth with stability and
social justice, that we have sought to give new emphasis and a new sense of urgency to
economic policy in recent months. The nationalisation of banks, for which there is
overwhelming support in this Honourable House and the country at large, will, I am
sure, be soon put on a stable footing. The Monopolies Act and the decisions that the
Government have already taken in the light of the recommendations of the Industrial
Licensing Policy Inquiry Committee should help to avoid the concentration of economic
power and provide encouragement to small and new entrepreneurs. At the same time,
well -established industrial companies will be able to participate in the core sector and
in industries with export orientation. It has also been decided that Government as well
as financial institutions should assume special responsibility to promote industrial
development in selected backward areas. The Fourth Plan, as it is now being revised,
will take particular care to look after some of the urgent socio-economic requirements,
such as the development of suitable techniques for dry farming areas, greater employment
opportunities for landless labour, the adequate supply of drinking water and the
improvement of urban environment in many of our congested metropolitan areas.
 10. According to Revised Estimates, the deficit at the Centre for 1969-70 is
now estimated to be Rs.290 crores as against the Budget Estimates of Rs.254 crores.
The transfer to State Governments, on account of their share in Central taxes and
duties, has increased by Rs.104 crores over the Budget Estimates, largely as a result
of the Finance Commission’s award. A substantial provision of Rs.275 crores by way
of non-Plan assistance to the States had also to be made so as to enable them to carry
out their Plan programmes. As a result of continued decline in imports, collection
 2

under import duties and disbursements under external aid are not likely to come up to
Budget Estimates. On the other hand, collections under income-tax and non-tax revenues
and receipts from market loans will be larger.
 11. Since several States continue to have gaps in resources, it would be prudent
to provide in advance for special assistance to them. Accordingly, it is proposed to
provide Rs. 175 crores in the Budget next year to cover the gaps in the resources of
certain States since otherwise it would be difficult for them to undertake worthwhile
Plan programmes. Provision for Plan assistance to the States is also being increased
from Rs.615 crores this year to Rs.635 crores next year. If State Governments are able
to raise additional resources and keep a careful watch on non-Plan expenditure, it should
be possible for them to increase their Plan outlay from roughly Rs.950 crores this year
to about Rs.115 0 crores next year, i. e. an increase of the order of 2 0 per cent.
 12. It is proposed to raise Central Plan outlays, including those on centrally
sponsored schemes from Rs.1223 crores this year to Rs.1411 crores next year, i. e. by
roughly 15 per cent. The Centre’s Plan next year provides Rs.39 crores more for
agriculture and allied programmes, Rs.84 crores more for transport and communications,
Rs.31 crores more for power and Rs.28 crores more for social services, including
family planning. The Plan outlay of the Union Territories is also being augmented
from Rs.66 crores to Rs.76 crores.
 13. Taking the Centre, States and the Union Territories together, the Plan
outlay will increase from Rs.2239 crores in 1969-70 to Rs.2637 crores in 1970-71 i e.
by about Rs.400 crores. At this stage, this represents a substantial effort to accelerate
the pace of development. In addition to the Plan provisions made in the Budget,
institutional finance to assist industry and agriculture will also be mobilised on a
larger scale next year. With the considerable step up in Plan outlay and the increased
provision of institutional finance, there should be significant increase in employment
opportunities in the coming year.
 14. Programmes of rural development which will be given special emphasis,
with the help of Plan provisions and Institutional. Finance, are summarised in a
memorandum which is being separately circulated to Honourable Members. This
memorandum also outlines some of the new initiatives which we propose to take in
order to combine growth with a greater regard for the welfare of the most needy
sections of society. I shall, therefore, refer to them only briefly here.
 (a) Special schemes for small farmers are being taken up in 45 districts and
 research on dry farming techniques is being accelerated.
 (b) It is proposed to provide next year a sum of Rs.25 crores for selected rural
 works programmes particularly in areas which are prone to famine. This
 provision will be outside the Plan and will form part of the amount set
 aside for drought relief during the year.
 3

 (c) An Urban Development Corporation with an authorised share capital of
 Rs.10 crores is being set up. The Corporation will borrow in the market to
 supplement its share capital and to set up a revolving fund for financing
 activities, such as slum clearance, housing and urban land development.
 (d) A substantial provision has been made in the Fourth Plan for the supply of
 drinking water. I have written to the Chief Ministers that the bulk of this
 provision should be used to provide drinking water to those areas which
 have no easy access to this basic requirement rather than to improve
 existing facilities in bigger towns.
 To provide more comprehensive benefits to industrial workers, who are
 liable to pay contribution to the Employees Provident Fund at the rate of
 8 per cent of their pay, it is proposed that a part of the contribution of
 employers and employees should be supplemented by a contribution from
 the Government to make up a separate fund from which family pensions
 as well as a lump sum payment in the event of death will be provided.
 (f) The minimum pension as also family pension for Central Government
 employees is proposed to be increased to Rs.40 per month. This decision
 will apply to those receiving’ pension at present as well as to those entitled
 to pensions in future. For industrial employees also, the scheme, to which
 I referred earlier, provides for a minimum family pension of Rs.40 per
 month.
 (g) To supplement existing schemes for school-feeding and the like, a
 beginning is being made with a programme to meet the nutritional
 requirements of the age group 0-3. A provision of Rs.4 crores is being
 made in the Budget for children in tribal development blocks and in city
 slums. From time to time, the programme will be extended with the help
 of specially designed schemes to raise additional resources.
 15. At the existing rates of taxation, revenue receipts are likely to increase
from Rs.3587 crores this year to Rs.3867 crores next year. After allowing for statutory
transfer to the States, the revenue receipts available to the Centre will increase from
Rs.2965 crores to Rs.3167 crores. Revenue expenditure next year is expected to increase
by Rs.176 crores, of which Rs.68 crores is on Plan schemes and Rs.108 crores on non-
Plan items. Total non-Plan expenditure has been restricted to the minimum and will
increase by about 4 per cent.
 16. Honourable Members will also be glad to note that the internal resources
of public sector enterprises, which are available for their expansion, will increase
from Rs.162 crores this year to Rs.2 02 crores next year. Market loans are estimated
at Rs.162 crores next year as against Rs.141 crores in the current year. Receipts under
PL 480 and other food aid, including some on revenue account, are expected to decline
 4

from Rs.239 crores this year to Rs.161 crores in 1970-71. Receipts under other aid
should be more or less of the same order as this year. Taking account of all other
items, including the provision for the Plan and for special assistance to the States
outside the Plan, the capital account will show a deficit of Rs.365 crores. The revenue
account is expected to show a marginal surplus of Rs.15 crores.
 17. With growing prosperity in rural areas, it has become all the more important
to tap rural savings for further development. Schemes to mobilise savings for a specific
purpose are likely to have greater appeal. A model scheme of debentures to be issued
by State, sponsored institutions has, therefore, been prepared and it is hoped that rural
debentures, floated in accordance with the scheme, will be an additional instrument
for the orderly mobilisation of rural savings. The extension of banking to rural areas
will serve the same purpose. Even today, our postal system extends to many areas
which cannot be- covered by banks in the near future. The postal system, therefore,
also needs to be harnessed for greater mobilisation of savings. At present our small
savings schemes, including Post Office Savings Bank accounts, otter facilities for
savings with a number of tax concessions. These tax concessions, however, are not of
much interest to the rural population or to low income groups, which by and large, are
not subject to taxation of income. To these groups, a higher rate of interest would be
more attractive than a lower rate with corresponding tax Concessions. Accordingly, it
is proposed to introduce a new series of time deposits, recurring deposits and savings
certificates, which will carry higher rates of interest without any special tax concessions.
The present tax-free facilities will also be continued with slightly higher rates of
interest. The rates of interest on contributions to the General Provident Fund and the
Public Provident Fund are also being enhanced slightly. I shall have occasion later to
refer to some changes in our direct tax structure, which are designed to promote
higher savings. A memorandum giving the full details of all these changes is being
separately circulated.




 PART ‘B’
 18. The expenditure proposals for 1970-71 which I have just presented have
been aimed at stimulating growth while providing for some measures of social welfare
for the less privileged sections of the community. The same considerations of growth
with social justice must govern the manner in which resources are raised to meet the
requirements of Government.
 19. In a country like India, where Government assumes the major part of the
responsibility for the promotion of capital formation, the Government Budget should
yield a substantial revenue surplus to take care of a part of the needs on capital
account. This is all the more so at a time when net receipts under foreign aid and
 5

concessional imports of food grains are declining in keeping with our objective of
achieving self-reliance in the shortest possible time. At existing rates of taxation, the
revenue account for 1976-71 will yield only a nominal surplus. The ratio of taxation
to national income in India is among the lowest in the world and over the recent past
it has declined from the level of a little over 14 per cent which was already reached in
1965-66. There is thus need to enlarge the tax base, so as to meet adequately the
continuing requirements of growth and social welfare.
 20. In enlarging the tax base, our first concern must be to ensure that the
taxes which are already levied are not avoided or evaded by devices which just manage
to keep on the right side of the law. Accordingly, I have tried to plug some major
loopholes in our tax system and to withdraw some of the concessions which have
outlived their utility. Taxation is also a major instrument in all-modern societies to
achieve greater equality of incomes and wealth. It is, therefore, proposed to make our
direct tax system serve this purpose by increasing income taxation at the higher levels
as well as by substantially enhancing the present rates of taxation on wealth and gifts.
Because of the urgent need to restrain speculative increases in urban land values and
individual holdings of urban property, the taxation of urban land and buildings is
being substantially increased. At the same time, the concessions available at present to
stimulate savings are being rationalised, so as to make them more effective. Some
marginal relief in direct taxation is also proposed for low income groups. In keeping
with the need to stimulate higher production and investment, no significant change in
corporate taxation is proposed.
 21. Nearly 75 per cent of Central tax revenues are derived from indirect
taxation, i.e. from customs and excise duties. Any attempt to impart greater strength to
the fiscal system, therefore, cannot disregard the scope for increase in indirect taxation.
The proposals in this field are designed primarily to raise additional resources in a
manner which helps our progress towards self reliance and restrains the consumption
of certain commodities. Such restraint is necessary from the economic or the social
point of view. By and large, the additional taxation of investment goods or producer
goods has been avoided and the bulk of the increase is in respect of final consumer
goods. Wherever it has been necessary to touch items of common consumption, an
attempt has been made to safeguard the consumption of the poorer sections of the
community to the maximum extent possible.
