 SPEECH OF SHRI CHARAN SINGH DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER
 AND MINISTER OF FINANCE INTRODUCING THE BUDGET
 FOR THE YEAR 1979-80


Sir,
 I rise to present the Budget for the year 1979-80.
 2. The Economic Survey for 1978-79 placed before the House a few days
ago presents a detailed account of the trends in the economy for the current year. I
shall therefore confine my observations to a few salient aspects of the economic situation
in the context of which the budget has been formulated.
 3. The performance of the Indian economy during the current year is a matter
for great satisfaction. Agricultural production has continued at a record level for the
second year in succession. This achievement is not due entirely to favourable seasonal
factors. The increased production is in good part also the result of increased availability
of irrigation and fertilizer, use of improved seeds, increased research and extension
activity and extended price support and procurement operations. It is also in a great
measure due to the energy and toil of minions of farmers who have undertaken
investment, absorbed new technology, adopted new cultural practices and contributed
to the general good by growing two ears of corn in place of one.
 4. So long as there is great poverty and unemployment in the country,
particularly in the rural areas, and agriculture has the largest potential for generating
employment, and providing purchasing power to the large majority of the people,
there can be no let up in the task of agricultural improvement. Our objective should be
to raise productivity further by using improved technology and more inputs. This
requires larger investment, greater effort in a variety of ways and better organisation.
 5. Industrial production is also expected to register an increase of 7 to 8 per
cent in the current year. This is due to an improvement in the production of a large
number of industries. In particular, the increase in production has been sharp in
electricity generation, food industries, electrical and non-electrical machinery, metal
products, textiles and transport equipment. The overall supplies of basic materials like
cement, fertilizer, steel and non-ferrous metals were augmented by sizable imports so
that shortages did not act as a constraint on domestic growth.
 6. If this rate of agricultural and industrial growth is to be maintained in the
coming year, supplies of basic goods should increase through larger investment. That
is why the Government is pushing ahead with a large investment programme in
irrigation, electricity generation, cement, steel, fertilizers and transport.
 1

 7. Price stability which this Government achieved last year has continued
through the current year as well. The wholesale price index on 10th February, 1979
was only 0.9 per cent above the level a year earlier and 0.4 per cent above the level
two years earlier. Such a record of price stability in a period in which national income
growth was about 11 per cent would be difficult to find elsewhere in the world. This
has been brought about by well-conceived supply and demand management policies.
The role of increased agricultural and industrial production and a liberalised import
policy in vital areas needs to be underscored in this regard. Simultaneously, a monetary
policy restricting the flow of credit for speculative activities in the economy and
directing the credit towards productive sectors has been pursued.
 8. An expanding investment programme needs an increasing volume of
resources. But resource mobilisation does not seem to match requirements. Government
finds that there is a tendency on the part of various sectors of the economy to look
upon tax concessions as the only way of improving their sagging fortunes. It must be
realised that If the resources needed for development are to be raised without inflation,
there will have to be a greater readiness on the part of people who can bear further
taxation to shoulder additional burden.
 9. Another instrument of resource mobilisation has also not yielded the results
expected. The surpluses of public sector undertakings have in 1977-78 been significantly
lower than anticipated. It looks as if the results may, not be appreciably better in the
current year as well. Considering that total investment in these enterprises is of the
order of Rs.12,800 crores, this is disappointing indeed.
 10. Savings in the economy have to increase if a rising level of investment is
to be financed in a non-inflationary way. This can be achieved, among other things, by
cutting down wasteful expenditure whether in Government or in the private sector.
Economy in Government expenditure can be brought about by restricting non-
development expenditure, particularly such subsidies as do not serve any specific
social or economic purpose. Private saving should be raised by a ruth-less curbing of
luxury expenditure and adoption of a more austere life style in tune with our traditional
values and the hard facts of our economic life.
 11. Exports which had recorded dynamic growth in the three years prior to
1977-78, have actually shown a decline in the first eight months of the current year.
This disturbing trend is due to a number of factors, including restrictions on some of
our more dynamic items in importing countries recessionary tendencies in the developed
world and increased domestic demand for certain exportables. It is most essential that
we reverse the declining trend in total exports by pursuing an active promotion policy.
 12. In addition to stressing the promotion of exports of manufactured goods,
we should not lose sight of the fact that as a large agricultural country there is need to
pursue an active policy with regard to the promotion of exports of agricultural products.
A policy which will increase exportable surpluses of such items as fruits, vegetables,
 2

certain types of vegetable oils, oil extractions and spices, needs to be pursued vigorously
because It will not only raise the incomes of the farmers but also generate additional
employment in the rural areas.
 13. The rising level of imports shows that the process of utilisation of reserves
for development has begun. In addition to imports of a consumer good like edible oil,
those of developmental goods like steel, cement, fertilizer, non-ferrous metals have
increased substantially. Import policy has been liberalised and, wherever necessary,
import duties have been reduced or waived altogether in order to facilitate imports of
capital goods, spare parts, components and raw materials and thus remove constraints
on production and investment.
 14. The rate of growth of the country’s foreign exchange reserves has slackened
in the current year. This is partly the result of the trends in exports and imports and the
slowing down of the growth of invisible earnings. It does not look as If we can expect
a continuous growth in these If account is taken of the various national and international
developments. Therefore, though the level of our reserves is high at present, there is
need to husband them carefully.
REVISED ESTIMATES FOR 1978-79
 15. Let me now take up the Revised Estimates for 1978-79.
 16. On the expenditure side there have been a number of post-budget
developments which cast additional burdens on the Centre in the current year.
 17. As the Hon’ble Members are aware, some of the State Governments
had, in recent years, been persistently overdrawing in excess of their borrowing
entitlements from the Reserve Bank. To enable the States to start with a clean slate
and avoid overdrafts in future, we had decided to extend special loans to the States
to clear their overdrafts as at the end of 1977-78. The payments on this account
amount to Rs.555 crores. Assistance to the States for gratuitous relief to people
affected by natural calamities had to be increased to Rs.40 crores from the original
provision of Rs.10 crores.
 18. To give the farmers a higher return on their produce, the procurement
prices of rice, wheat and coarse grains were increased during the year involving
additional expenditure of about Rs.42 crores. After allowing for certain arrear payments
to the Food Corporation and larger receipts following an increase in issue price of
wheat from December 1978, expenditure on food subsidy during the current year will
be Rs.114 crores more than the Budget Estimate of Rs.466 crores.
 19. Expenditure on export assistance will be Rs.130 crores higher than the
Budget provision of Rs.251 crores due partly to substantial spill over claims of previous
year. Loss on sugar exports of 8.5 lakhs tonnes in 1978 will be Rs.23 crores more than
the original provision of Rs.10 crores.
 3

 20. Non-Plan assistance on a larger scale than what was anticipated at the
Budget stage had to be provided to a number of public sector units which experienced
financial difficulties. Coal India will be requiring assistance of Rs.173 crores, against
the provision of Rs.90 crores. Certain other units like the Fertilizer Corporation and
National Textile Corporation also need substantial additional assistance. As a result,
non-Plan loans to the public undertakings will be Rs.159 crores more than the Budget
Estimate of Rs.250 crores.
 21. As small savings fetched more than what was anticipated, loans to State
Governments towards their share of collections will also be Rs.165 crores more than
the Budget provision of Rs.300 crores; a part of the increase is on account of the spurt
in collections towards the end of the previous year.
 22. Defence expenditure in the current year is estimated at Rs.2845 crores as
against the Budget provision of Rs.2945 crores.
 23. The progress of Central Plan expenditure has been somewhat uneven and
overall Budget support for Central Plan expenditure is estimated to be less by Rs.201
crores as compared to the provision of Rs.4520 crores made for it. The major shortfalls
are anticipated in petroleum, fertilizer and telecommunication projects. 011 and Natural
Gas Commission will require Rs.63 crores less due to rephasing and postponement of
certain works of its off-shore programme. 011 industry Development Board will also
require Rs.68 crores less due to shortfall in petroleum sector’s outlay. Fertilizer projects
will require Rs.36 crores less as compared to the original provision of Rs.236 crores;
the shortfall relates mainly to Trombay V and Cohcin Phase II units and the new gas
based fertilizer plant to be set up in Maharashtra. The outlay on telecommunication
projects, which is mostly financed out of internal resources, is anticipated to be Rs.46
crores less, mainly due to delay in receipt of equipment and stores.
 24. A shortfall of Rs.25 crores is anticipated in agricultural schemes. Certain
agricultural schemes have not picked up the necessary tempo owing to delays in
implementation by the State Governments or in formulation of the detailed schemes
and inadequacy of necessary infrastructure. These problems are being tackled. Certain
schemes have, however, made good progress. Hon’ble Members would be glad to
know that the food for work programme is becoming a major instrument of rural
development and employment promotion and the provision of Rs.30 crore made for
the scheme has been stepped up to Rs.100 crores and is expected to generate 40 crore
man-days of work during the year. Dairy development, which will also provide gainful
employment and increased incomes in the rural areas, has been allocated Rs.19 crores
more over the Budget provision of Rs.11 crores.
 25. The current Budget provides Rs.2761 crores for assistance to State and
Union Territory Plans. As Hon’ble Members are aware, States affected by floods this
year suffered serious erosion of resources and would not have been able to finance
their approved Plan outlays without additional assistance from the Centre. It had
 4

accordingly become necessary to provide additional Plan assistance of Rs.325 crores
to those States. Rural Electrification Corporation had also to be provided with Rs.39
crores more from the Budget to finance its approved Plan schemes which are in the
State sector. According to Revised Estimates, Central assistance for State and Union
Territory Plans in the current year is placed at Rs.3112 crores.
 26. As regards receipts in the current year, collections from small savings are
expected to exceed the Budget Estimate of Rs.460 crores by Rs.140 crores, thanks to
the sustained efforts of Central and State agencies concerned. Deposits of non-
Government provident funds are also estimated to be Rs.75 crores more than the
Budget Estimate of Rs.225 crores. Gold sales, for which no credit was assumed at the
Budget stage, have fetched Rs.86 crores. Recoveries of temporary credits extended in
earlier years to bilateral trading countries will also show an improvement of Rs.75
crores following larger imports from them.
 27. Dislocation of industrial production in the eastern part of the country
consequent on floods this year, and decline in the profit margins of certain major
public sector undertakings have adversely affected receipts from corporation and income
taxes. The receipts are estimated to be about Rs.102 crores less than the Budget Estimate
of Rs.2577 crores. Union excise and customs duties taken together show an
improvement of Rs.145 crores. While, consequent on liberalisation of import policy
and larger imports to meet domestic requirements, customs duties are expected to
yield Rs.250 crores more than the Budget Estimate of Rs.1860 crores, Union excise
duties, on the other hand, will fetch Rs.105 crores less than the Budget Estimate of
Rs.5299 croree. This shortfall is, among other things, due to lower realisation on
sugar consequent on withdrawal of duty on khandsari sugar and fall in sugar prices
after decontrol. There has been shortfall in excise revenue from kerosene, man-made
fibres, aluminium and copper, which is, however, more than made up by larger receipts
of import, duties on these commodities.
 28. Utilisation of external aid has slowed down due to a shift from programme
to project assistance by multilateral aid giving agencies and also allocation of a greater
proportion of bilateral assistance from some countries to specific projects. In both
cases, the concerned projects are slow moving and, consequently, gross aid receipts
are expected to be Rs.447 crores less than the Budget Estimates. Steps are however
being taken to accelerate the pace of disbursements.
 29. Taking other variations in receipts and expenditure into account the overall
deficit in the current year is estimated at Rs.1590 crores as against the original estimate
of Rs.1071 crores. This is exclusive of the additional burden of Rs.555 crores cast on
the Centre by the loans to certain States for clearing their past deficits which, being in
the nature of a book adjustment, will not have an economic impact in the current year.
BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR 1979-80
 30. I shall now present the estimates of expenditure for 1979-80.
 5

 31. This budget reflects the impact of the recommendations of the Seventh
Finance Commission which have been accepted by Government. While a larger transfer
of resources to States in pursuance of ‘the award of the Commission is eminently
desirable for strengthening our federal polity, it creates serious problems for the Centre’s
finances in the short run. This budget seeks to cope with these problems.
 32. The annual Plan of the Centre, States and Union Territories for 1979-80
would be Rs.12511 crores compared with an approved total outlay of Rs.11649 crores
in 1978-79. This represents an increase of 7.4 per cent. However, in assessing these
figures Hon’ble Members should bear in mind that an estimated sum of Rs.835 crores
has been transferred as committed expenditure from the Plan side to the non-Plan side
in the Central and State Plans. Taking into account this transfer, the step-up in
developmental effort in 1979-80 would be of a significant order.
 33. The Central Budget for 1979-80 provides a sum of Rs.7108 crores for
the Central Plan and for assistance towards the Plans of States and Union Territories.
A provision of Rs.2300 crores has been made for Central assistance towards outlays
of States’ Plans, Union Territories’ Plans, and the sub-Plans of Hills and Tribal areas,
schemes of North-Eastern Council and Rural Electrification Corporation. Inclusive
of their own resources, the Plans of States, Union Territories, North Eastern Council,
etc. will amount to Rs.6099 crores in 1979-80 as against an outlay of Rs.5985 crores
in 1978-79.
 34. The provision in the Budget for the Central Plan amounts to Rs.4808
crores. Together with the internal and other resources of public sector undertakings
amounting to Rs.1604 crores, Central Plan in 1979- 80 will, therefore, be of the order
of Rs.6412 crores, as against Rs.5664 crores in 1978-79.
 35. Subsequent to the determination of the outlays for the Central Plan and
the Plans of the States for 1979-80, a decision has been taken at the recent meeting of
the National Development Council to effect some modifications in respect of Centrally
sponsored schemes. The funds now allocated for some of the Centrally sponsored
schemes will be released for distribution among the States on the basis of a new
formula. Consequential adjustments, in the Budget provisions for 1979-80 for these
schemes, will be made in the course of the year.
 36. As Hon’ble Members are aware, the, objective of eradicating poverty
and unemployment is basic to our new development strategy. This calls for a
radical restructuring of the priorities in our Plans. Agricultural and rural
development have therefore been assigned the pride of place in our Plans. But
Government recognises that the-requisite degree of reorientation of development
plans can be achieved only over a period of time. We propose, however, to
accelerate the pace and thrust of programmes which have a material bearing on
agricultural growth and promotion of employment.
 37. The Plan outlay on agriculture and rural development has been raised
 6

from Rs.1754 crores in 1976-79 to Rs.1811 crores in 1979-80. An outlay of Rs.258
crores has been provided for accelerating the integrated rural development programme
in 2000 blocks covered by any one of the special programmes and in 300 other blocks
not covered by any of the special programmes so far. The focus will be on the
Improvement of the economic conditions of small and marginal farmers agricultural
labourers, rural artisans and scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. A provision of
Rs.50 crores is being made for the food for work programme. I have no doubt that I
shall have to raise this figure steeply taking into account the experience in the current
year. Such an increase will, however, have no inflationary impact as we will be drawing
upon our accumulated stocks of food grains.
 38. Government does not have to stress in this House the importance of
irrigation for agricultural development. The outlay on major, medium and minor
irrigation projects including flood control for 1979-80 will be Rs.1488 crores compared
to Rs.1401 crores in 1978-79. Most of this outlay will be in the budgets of State
Governments. The target for the creation of additional irrigation potential in 1979-80
has been fixed at 3.2 million hectares as against a target of 2.8 million hectares in
1978-79. In order to increase the pace of development of minor irrigation, a scheme is
being worked out for extending the subsidy on minor irrigation, given at present only
to small and marginal farmers, to farmers whose land holding is between 2 and 4
hectares, but at a reduced rate. To this end a provision of Rs.10 crores is being made.
The Plan provision for the minor irrigation programme will be supplemented with
resources available from the Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation.
The financial support made available to the Agricultural Refinance and Development
Corporation from the Central budget has been increased from Rs.133 crores in 1978-
79 to Rs.159 crores in 1979-80.
 39. In the context of the great importance we attach to rural development and
employment oriented programmes in rural areas, it is necessary to ensure that in the
coming years the flow of institutional finance to rural areas will be smooth, steady
and at reasonable rates of interest. In addition to many steps already taken, Government
has decided to exempt the Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation, the
premier refinancing agency for agricultural term loans, from income tax. This
concession, together with other measures we are contemplating, will enable the
Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation to reduce the rate of interest at
which it refinances loans for minor irrigation and land development by about 1 per
cent; the Reserve Bank will take corresponding steps to ensure that the full benefit of
this reduction of about one per cent is passed on by the commercial banks to the
ultimate borrower. As a result, farmers will find it cheaper and therefore more attractive
to invest in minor irrigation and land development.
 40. Hon’ble Members are aware that as part of the strategy of rural
development, a National Dairy Development Programme, known as Operation Flood
II, intended to raise the nutritional standards of the people, generate employment and

 7

augment incomes in rural areas through a viable subsidiary occupation had been
approved. An outlay of Rs.32 crores has been provided in the Central Plan for 1979-
80 for this programme. On completion it will provide gainful employment for about
10 million farm families and assure increased availability of milk to our people.
 41. Rural electrification plays an important part in agricultural and rural
development. The total outlay for the rural electrification programme will be Ils.285
crores in 1979-80. An additional sum of Rs.50 crores will be mobilised for this purpose
through commercial banks, the Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation
and the Rural Electrification Corporation. Comparable figures in 1978- 79 are Rs.277
crores and Rs.20 crores respectively. As against 22000 villages expected to be electrified
in 1978-79, the target for 1979-80 has been set at 25000 villages.
 42. With the increase in agricultural output there is an obvious need for
increased storage to minimise wastage. A scheme is therefore being worked out to
have subsidised storage facilities in rural areas. This will have two fold benefits: grain
can be stored near the place of production thus reducing wastage; and it will reduce
the cost of storage for Government because godowns can be built cheaper and the cost
of holding inventories will be borne by the farmers.
 43. This Government is committed to the acceleration of the rural water supply
programmes so as to make safe and reliable drinking water available in all problem
villages. The Central Plan for 1979-80 includes a provision of Rs.80 crores for this
programme as against Rs.60 crores allocated in 1978-79.
 After this Government came to power in March 1977, 18000 villages
were provided with water supply in 1977-78. The target for 1978-79 is 27000. I wish
to assure the House that Government will have no hesitation in allocating more funds
for this purpose if the programme makes faster progress.
 44. Economic exploitation and social discrimination against scheduled castes
and scheduled tribes will not cease unless programmes for their development are built
upon a sound economic basis. Therefore Central ministries and State Governments
have been asked to incorporate a special component in their Plan for 1979-80 for
these categories so that they may secure an adequate flow of benefits from the various
sectoral programmes. The outlay on welfare programmes for scheduled castes and
other backward classes will be Rs.117 crores in 1979-80.
 45. A provision of Rs.70 crores has been made for the tribal sub-plan for
1979-80. This will supplement the flow of funds from State Governments under different
heads of development. The States would also be receiving grants under the
recommendations of the Seventh Finance Commission for providing incentives to
their staff working in the difficult conditions in the tribal areas.
 46. The development of village industries is an important component of the
Central Plan. A provision of Rs.193 crores has been made in 1979-80 in the Central
 8

sector as against Rs.140 crores originally provided for in the current year. This outlay
would be supplemented by suitable provisions in the State Plans and by institutional
resources available on easy terms and conditions.
 47. Handloom is our most important village industry. There are nearly 4 million
handlooms providing employment to about 10 million people. They produced 2500
million metres of cloth in 1978-79 and the target for 1979-80 is 2700 million metres.
A provision of Rs.28 crores is being made in 1979-80 to organise weavers into
cooperative societies, to enable apex cooperative bodies in this sector to do better
marketing and to promote intensive development for export.
 48. In keeping with the Government’s policy of extending postal services in
rural areas, it is proposed to open 5000 new post offices and provide 10,000 postal
counters through mobile post offices in 1979-80. Outlay on telecommunications will
be Rs.359 crores in 1979-80 with greater emphasis than hitherto on extending these
facilities to rural areas.
 49. Care has also been taken to provide adequately for the development of the
basic infrastructure on which the progress of agriculture and industries alike would be
dependent. Thus the provision for power, coal, fertilizers and chemicals, minerals,
petroleum, steel and roads and railways has been increased from Rs.2733 crores in the
Central Plan for 1978-79 to Rs.3122 crores in 1979-80.
 50. The growth of power production has an important role to play in the
development of agriculture as well as industry. Allocation for the power sector in
1978-79 had been stepped up substantially to Rs.221.7 crores. The tempo of
development is sought to be speeded up, still further in 1979-80 and an outlay of
Rs.2466 crores is being provided. The bulk of the Plan provision for power will be in
the State Plans but an allocation of Rs.382 crores is for power projects in the Central
sector. A major start in 1979-80 will be the super thermal station at Farakka. It is
expected that 3000 MW generating capacity will be added in 1979-80 as against 2500
MW in the current year. The facilities for distribution of power are also being improved.
 51. Self-sufficiency in fertilizer production is an important objective of
Government policy. A provision of Rs.254 crores for investment in fertilizer plants
has been made in the Plan for 1979-80. This will cover expenditure on a number of
on-going projects which will raise production in the public sector from 12 lakhs tonnes
of nutrients this year to 20 lakh tonnes in 1979-80. Also, starts will be made on two
off-shore gas based plants on the west coast and an additional gas based unit in Assam.
 52. The demand for steel has increased by about 15 per cent in the current
year due to increased activity and investment in the economy. The increased production
of mini steel plants has averted a serious shortage which would have otherwise occurred.
An outlay of Rs.600 crores being made for the steel sector in 1979-80 has to be
viewed in the context of the growing demand. This provision will enable. work on the
expansion of Bokaro and Bhilai Plants and on the new plant at Salem to be continued.
 9

 53. Coal is as basic to our development as power and there is an urgent need
to raise its production. Coal production in the current year is estimated not to exceed
a figure of 102 million tonnes as severe floods affected production. The allocation for
the coal sector has been raised from Rs.267 crores in the current year to Rs.346 crores
in 1979-80.
 54. Oil is an equally important source of energy and Government attaches
great importance to the exploration and development of oil fields so that our dependence
on imported oil is minimised. The development of Bombay High will be substantially
completed next year. With the commissioning of the 3 million tonne expansion at the
Koyali refinery, the country’s refining capacity has touched 30 million tonnes per
year. Allocations to this sector in 1979-80 will be Rs.6221 crores.
 55. Roads are of vital importance to the nation and a provision-of Rs.120
crores is proposed for 1979-80 for national highways, strategic roads, roads in the
border areas in the north and roads of Inter-State economic importance. This %%411
be supplemented by allocations from the State Plans to cover State highways and
district and rural roads.
 56. In our country urbanisation has led to a growth of slums and squatter
settlements. Essential facilities like water supply, community latrines and baths, wide
and paved streets and provision of street lighting have been badly lacking for these
people. Government has decided therefore to pursue actively a policy of slum
improvement. Against a total expenditure of Rs.43 crores on slum improvement in
1974-78, an outlay of Rs.190 crores has been envisaged in the period 1978-83. The
States will have to push through this programme in a big way. If they undertake to
mobilise additional resources for this purpose by taxing the affluent sections in the
urban areas, Government will be happy to supplement their efforts. Government will
examine in consultation with the States how the slum improvement programme can be
accelerated so as to alleviate the living conditions of the urban poor.
 57. In realigning the priorities in the educational sector, Government attaches
the highest importance to the education of the masses. The provision for adult education
in the Central Plan for 1979-80 is being accordingly increased and comes to nearly 20
per cent of the total outlay of Rs.84 crores for education in the Central Plan.
 58. It is now widely accepted that the programmes of development of
agriculture or rural industries will not make sufficient progress unless the rural
population acquires the relevant skills. Very little headway has, however, been made
in the training of rural youth to acquire these skills. This is partly because of a lack of
an effective training programme and partly a lack of proper organisation linking skills
with capital. Since such training is an essential precondition of the success of the
production programme, Government proposes to make financial provision for a
programme of ‘training rural youth for self employment’ in the course of the year as
soon as the details of such a programme axe worked out.
 10

 59. There is little doubt that the growth of population at the present rate needs
to be checked if economic development is to lead to a perceptible increase in the
standard of living of the people. Unfortunately, as a result of the wrong, approach to
family planning followed in the past, this programme has suffered a serious set back.
It should be our endeavour to put the newly introduced family welfare programme on
a sound footing so that the national objective of reducing the birth rate to 30 per
thousand in 1982-83 from the current level of 33 per thousand may be achieved. The
Community Health Workers Scheme which was started in October 1977 in 741 primary
health centres was a significant innovation of the Javata Government in extending
elementary medical care to rural areas. It is proposed to cover a third of the country
under the scheme in 1979-80 and the entire country by 1982-83.
 60. Non-Plan expenditure has been limited to what is strictly necessary keeping
in view the need for economy consistent with efficiency.
 61. Pefence expenditure is estimated at Rs.3050 crores as against Rs.2845
crores in the current year.
 62. Provision for food subsidy at Ils.560 crores will be Ps.10 creres less than
in the current year. Rs.448 crores have been provided next year for fertilizer subsidies
as against Rs.319 crores in the current year.
 63. Debt service charges at Rs.2161 crores will be about Rs.304 crores more
than in the current year, the increase being mainly on account of internal debt.
 64. Statutory grants to States will be Rs.232 crores as compared to Rs.514
crores in the current year. The provision next year is based on the recommendations of
the Seventh Finance Commission. The Commission has also recommended additional
grants to certain States to cover their net interest liability and for upgradation of
standards of administration. I have not, at this stage, included any provision for payment
of grant-in-aid for these purposes and shall come before the House with request for
supplementary funds after the action programmes for schemes of upgradation are
drawn up and finalised by the State Governments concerned and the net interest liability
assessed as recommended by the Commission.
 65. Government is sure that Hon’ble Members will share its concern at the
growing volume of Government expenditure. It is therefore important to contain the
growth of this expenditure and also to ensure that the funds are utilised effectively for
the promotion of the common good. Government has therefore decided to appoint a
Commission with suitable terms of reference to conduct a comprehensive inquiry into
Government expenditure. It will, among other things, examine the impact of public
expenditure on the promotion of growth and reduction of poverty and recommend
ways and means of making public expenditure more effective in solving the problem
of poverty.
 66. Coming now to Receipts, gross tax revenue in 1979-80 at existing rates of
 11

taxation is estimated at Rs.10822 crores, showing an increase of Rs.658 crores over
the Revised Estimates for the current year. Of this increase, Union excise duties will
contribute Rs.381 crores and corporation and income taxes Rs.248 crores.
 67. As mentioned earlier, substantially larger devolution of Central taxes and
duties will have to be made to the States from the next financial year in accordance
with the recommendations of the Seventh Finance Commission. At the present level
of taxation, States’ share next year is estimated at Rs.3235 crores which is Rs.1278
crores more than in the current year. Consequently, Centre’s net tax revenue, at Rs.7587
crores, will be Rs.620 crores less than in the current year.
 68. Market loans will yield Rs.1860 crores as against Rs.1653 crores in the
current year. Net external assistance, after meeting repayment and interest liabilities,
is estimated at Rs.878 crores, including drawals against new credits. Small savings
collections will fetch Rs.650 crore’s. Loan repayments by States, excluding ways and
means advances, are placed at Re. 554 crores as against Rs.754 crores in the current
year. The decline is due to debt rescheduling recommended by the Seventh Finance
Commission.
 69. The total receipts of the Central Government for 1979-80 will be Rs.16551
crores. Total expenditure for the coming year will be Rs.18526 crores. The overall
budgetary gap at the existing rates of taxation will thus be Rs.1975 crores.
