 SPEECH OF SHRI C.SUBRAMANIAM MINISTER OF FINANCE
 INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1976-77
Sir,
 1.1 It is my privilege, Sir, once again, to present the Budget to this
august House.
 1.2 Last year, when I outlined the Budget proposals for 1975-76, the emphasis
was on stabilisation and consolidation. The economy was just then recovering from a
severe bout of inflation; and the agricultural situation was none too secure.
 1.3 The outlook has changed in many ways this year, thanks to resolute and
dynamic leadership. The New Economic Programme has generated an unprecedented
sense of discipline and dedication in every facet of our economic life. Taking
advantage of the improved situation, additional investments in important sectors
were authorised during the latter half of 1975-76 and the country is now poised for
a major advance in its path towards progress. I am seizing this opportunity to step
up the tempo of development further and to impart an added dynamism to the
economy. I shall give you the details presently. But Hon’ble Members would, I am
sure, be glad to be told straightaway that the Plan outlay of Rs.7852 crores for 1976-
77 represents an increase of 31.6 per cent over the allocation for 1975-76. This
marks the highest step up in development outlays in any one year since the beginning
of the era of planning in our country.
 1.4 The main thrust in this Budget is thus towards accelerated growth. But
considerations of stability will continue to be important, The world around us is still
subject to considerable buffeting, from price inflation in some areas and from recession
in some others. For the first time in post-war history, the volume of world trade
registered a significant decline in 1975. This is associated with the fall in the level of
economic activity in the OECD countries. There are now signs of recovery in some of
the countries, but they appear to be weak. Inflation continues to ravage a number of
countries. All this implies a strain on the balance of payments situation for developing
countries which are not exporters of petroleum. Our economy, though more strongly
placed than some others, is not entirely immune to these pressures. Its sound
management will continue to call for the utmost vigilance from all of us.
 1.5 India’s economic performance during the current year has been a source
of satisfaction, indeed pride, to all of us. There has been all-round improvement in
production. Key sectors of the economy-in agriculture, in industry, in mining, power,
transport and the like-have touched new peaks in performance. The country has had
the unique distinction of sustaining a declining trend in prices since October 1974.
 1

The wholesale price index for the week ending February 21,1976 declined to 288, and
is about 7.3 per cent lower than a year ago; last year, at this time, prices were 12.5
percent higher than the earlier year. Consumer prices too have shown a declining
trend. The All India Industrial Workers Consumer Price Index was 298 in January
1976 as compared to 326 in January 1975-a decline of 8.6 per cent. I would also, like
to bring to the notice of Hon’ble Members that the 12-monthly moving average of the
consumer price index has come down to 318.6. This success in the struggle against
inflation has helped to dispel the mood of pessimism and doubt which prevailed during
1973-74. The manner, in which this battle was won, despite heavy odds, is living
proof of the basic strength and resilience of the Indian economy.
 1.6 Last year, I had invited the attention of Hon’ble Members to the need not,
only of holding, the price line, but also of taking positive steps to stimulate growth in
the economy. It is therefore a matter of particular satisfaction that the favourable turn
in prices during the year has been accompanied by a welcome acceleration in the rate
of growth of the economy. On present indications, national income in real terms will
increase by about 5.5 per cent in 1975-76. This is attributable to the many determined
efforts made by the Government, particularly since the launching, in July, 1975 of the
New Economic Programme, to remove the various obstacles that come in the, way of
increased production in factories and farms. The prospects for agricultural development
have improved greatly on account of the vigorous steps taken to increase the supply of
quality seeds, water and fertilisers. The determined action taken to increase the
production of such vital inputs as power, coal and steel augurs well for the further
growth of industrial production. The country’s external payments will also derive
considerable benefit from measures adopted against smuggling, and preventing leakage
of foreign exchange through unauthorised channels. The fact that at the end of the
current year food stocks with public sector agencies will be as high as about 11 million
tonnes lends considerable strength to the economy. Altogether, the many beneficial
effects of strict enforcement of economic discipline can be easily perceived by any
impartial observer of the Indian economic scene. The highly satisfactory performance
of the economy during 1975-76 now enables us to take further measures to accelerate
the tempo of social and economic development in the coming year.
 II
 2.1 Adequate investment in key sectors of the economy constitutes a basic
condition for a sustained increase in the rate of economic growth. It was in pursuance
of this objective that the Annual Plan outlay was stepped up by nearly 25 per cent in
1975-76. Fortunately, the present state both of our food economy and our external
reserves is such that we can think in terms of a further major in crease in investment
outlays in 1976-77, without upsetting the stability of prices. Clearly, public sector
investment has to play the leading role in this area. Consequently, it has been my
foremost concern in the Budget for 1976-77 to provide for the maximum possible

 2

increase in investment consistent with the available organisational capacities for
physical performance. The Annual Plan for 1976-77 visualises an outlay of Rs.7852
crores, which, as I said earlier, represents an increase of 31.6 per cent over the Plan
outlay for 1975-76.
 2.2 I am confident that the contemplated increase in the Plan outlay can be
reconciled with continued stability of prices though this is achievable only on the
basis of the strictest possible economic discipline. The struggle against inflation was
successful only because the country willingly accepted the needed economic discipline.
The fact that prices are currently stable does not warrant the conclusion that enforcement
of economic discipline can be relaxed. Price stability has to be sustained through
deliberate cooperative efforts on the part of all sections of the community. It would be
a grave mistake to take price stability for granted. If we are not vigilant, inflation will
raise its ugly head again. This means that the planned increases in investment must, to
the maximum extent possible, be financed through a genuine increase in savings. It
also means that the community must voluntarily agree to sacrifice current consumption
for the sake of accelerated growth in the future. Our economic policies must assist in
promoting the growth of investment and savings. Later in my speech, I shall describe
the manner in which our tax system is being adapted to facilitate, this outcome. At the
same time, every effort must be made to curb the growth of non-development
expenditure. The general improvement in discipline since the declaration of Emergency
has not only led to increased efficiency in Government administration, but also to
considerable savings on account of overtime payments. We have to sustain this
momentum. In the current year, public sector enterprises have shown encouraging
results with the growth rate of production reaching about 15 per cent. We must
continuously improve upon this performance so that the country gets the maximum
yield from the massive investment outlays of the past. Similarly, the private sector
must also accept the inescapable need for the utmost discipline in the use of both real
and financial resources. Credit policies must of course respond to changing economic
needs. Nevertheless, there can be no getting away from the basic commitment to. a
rational system of credit use in line with national priorities. The lending pattern of
term financing institutions must also be consistent with national priorities. Effective
arrangements for procurement and public distribution of mass consumption goods
must also he an essential component of the national economic scene.
 2.3 In my budget speech last year, I had indicated the broad sectoral priorities
underlying the budget proposals for 1975-76. These priorities are still valid. It does
not require much argument to prove that abolition of mass poverty in a country such
as ours can be ensured only through a sustained attack on rural poverty. As Mahatma
Gandhi reminded us so often, India lives in its villages. This means, the foremost
priority must continue to be, given to programmes of agricultural development and
such supporting sectors as power, irrigation, fertilisers and pesticides. In this context,
I would like to emphasise that an effective attack on rural poverty and under-
 3

development can only be planned in the framework of an integrated programme of
rural development based on detailed knowledge of local needs, resource endowments
and potentialities. The focus must be on maximum utilisation of locally available
resources, including local manpower, rather than on the introduction of large inputs
from outside. We have to evolve operational district plans which fully take into
account the precise and separate requirements of each area. For this purpose, a
comprehensive survey of natural resources assumes great urgency, We have to make
full use of the potential offered by modern science and technology for the regeneration
of our rural economy.
 2.4 The over-all aim of our approach should be to evolve an operational
strategy with the twin objectives of productive employment of the available work-
force and of the scientific utilisation of all our natural resources. It is true that such a
development strategy cannot be pit into operation overnight. Much spade work is
necessary before genuinely operational programmes can be devised. There must be
scope for innovation and adaptation in the light of varying needs and circumstances.
For such efforts in the field of integrated rural development, a sum of Rs.15 crores has
been earmarked in the Central Budget for 1976-77. I hope that on the basis of experience
gained in 1976-77 we shall be able to expand progressively the scope of this programme.
 2.5 There is a very close relationship between modern scientific agriculture
and industry. Progress in agriculture depends crucially on the supply of inputs such as
quality seeds, water, power and fertilisers. In the current year, the National Seeds
Project has made satisfactory progress and there is currently no shortage of quality
seeds. The speed with which inter-State river disputes have recently been resolved
will surely facilitate a faster and more rational development of the country’s vast
water resources.
 2.6 The experience of the last few years shows the grave risks inherent in
excessive dependence on imported supplies of fertilisers. We,’ therefore, need to push
ahead as fast as we can with our fertiliser programme. I derive considerable satisfaction
from the fact that the utilisation of fertiliser capacity in the country has. improved
considerably during the current year. Today it can be said with confidence that we
have no shortage of fertilisers.
 2.7 Government have recently made a review of fertiliser prices, having regard
to. the importance of ensuring that the output-input ratio in agriculture does serve to
stimulate further investment and thus larger production. Hon’ble Members would be
happy to learn that it has been decided to reduce the price of urea from Rs.1850 to
Rs.1750 per tonne. There is also need to promote balanced application of Nitrogen,
Phosphorus and Potash. The consumption of phosphatic and potassic fertilisers has
lagged behind the desired levels. Government have, therefore, decided to effect a
reduction in the prices of all indigenously produced phosphatic fertilisers and some
select categories of imported phosphatic fertilisers by Rs.1250 per tonne of P2 05 . The
 4

price of muriate of potash will also be reduced from Rs.1085 to Rs.900 per tonne. I
shall also refer later on to proposals in regard to imported rock phosphate. I am confident
that these price reductions would serve to step up levels of fertiliser consumption.
 2.8 Modern agriculture requires vastly increased inputs of credit. Since
nationalisation, commercial banks have expanded greatly their activities in the rural
areas. There is, however, still a vast gap between what is available and what is needed.
This gap is now sought to be filled partially by the newly established regional rural
banks which will lay special emphasis on meeting the credit needs of the more
vulnerable sections of rural community.
 2.9 One cannot over emphasise the need for expanding the production of
such critical inputs as power, coal, oil and iron and steel for the development of the
country’s economy, particularly its industrial base. Production of these items has shown
an encouraging trend in 1975-76. Production of coal is expected to reach the record
level of 98 million tonnes in 1975-76. The generation of power will show an
improvement of about 13 per cent. Yet, there is still a pressing need to push ahead at
a faster pace. The establishment of super thermal power stations constitutes an essential
plank of the programme to rid the country of continuing power shortages. The oil
exploration programme has gained considerable momentum both on- shore and off-
shore and, on present indications, the medium-term prospects appear highly favourable.
In order to sustain growing production in the years to come, we must provide all these
industries with adequate investible resources. This to precisely what is being done in
the Budget for 1976-77.
 2.10 In planning the national investment strategy, we have also to ensure that
the level and the sectoral composition of private investment are in line with our national
priorities. I recognise that in recent years, investment levels in some major industries
have fallen short of requirements. Government have adopted several measures to
improve the profitability of some priority industries. Pricing policy has been made
more flexible. In some cases prices have been decontrolled while in others a system of
dual prices has been adopted with a view to providing a reasonable return to the
investors consistent with protecting the users in priority sectors against excessive
price increases. It goes without saying that in a fast changing world, our pricing
policies must retain the needed degree of flexibility to ensure a proper balance between
the interests of producers and of consumers,
 2.11 I am aware that in recent years there has been a steep escalation in
capital costs which has affected the profitability of new investment. This could not
have been foreseen when the decision to withdraw the development rebate was
taken some years ago. I am convinced that the problems created by escalation in
capital costs are genuine, and means have to be found to tackle them effectively.
This Budget will attempt to do this.
 2.12 Under the existing Capital issues (Exemption) Order, the specific consent
 5

of the Controller of Capital issues is required only for bonus issues and for issue of
capital by companies registered under the MRTP Act. In the case of other issues,
companies have only to file a statement of proposals with the Controller if the issue
exceeds Ra. 25 lakhs during a twelve-month period. It is now proposed to raise this
limit to Rs.50 lakhs. There will, however, be no change regarding the regulations
covering bonus issues or issues by MRTP concerns.
 2.13 It has been a matter of particular concern to us that such important
industries as cotton textiles, jute manufactures and sugar have not devoted enough
resources to modernisation and expansion. These industries process important
agricultural raw materials, and offer direct employment to a large number of workers.
They are also a major source of the country’s foreign exchange receipts. In addition,
cloth and sugar are major articles of mass consumption. The country has, therefore, a
vital stake in the good health of these industries. Certain segments of the engineering
industries are also faced with ‘sickness’ which has to be checked in time. In the
cement industry, a significant improvement in the economy, of production can be
secured by a changeover from wet to dry process. The provision of adequate resources
for modernisation and rehabilitation of these industries is therefore another matter of
high priority. To that end, arrangements are being made to provide the Industrial
Development Bank with enough resources to enable it, in collaboration with other
term-lending institutions, to finance the requirements of modernisation, renovation
and rehabilitation of these industries.
 2.14 I would like to emphasise that very often lack of effective management
is a basic cause of the sickness of an industry. Along with provision of financial
assistance, financial institutions should, I feel, devise sound mechanisms to tone up
the management of assisted concerns,. R also needs to be emphasised that sound
development of industries such as sugar is also greatly dependent on the adoption of
a stable long-term policy for the growth of production of sugarcane. Similarly, the
progress of the cotton textiles industry is linked to the evolution of a sound policy
for the development of raw cotton. Additionally, any integrated textile policy must
ensure effective protection for the handloom sector which provides employment to
a very large number of poor weavers.
 2.15 It is no doubt true that currently some industries are faced with inadequate
demand. I would hope that the contemplated increase in Plan outlays for 1976-77 will
provide a major stimulus to the greater utilisation of existing industrial capacities. A
number of industries producing consumer durables are experiencing considerable
difficulties. While there may be a case for the sake of preventing unemployment for
helping these industries to tide over transitional problems, their long-term survival is
clearly linked to their ability to diversify their activities and to produce the type of
goods for which there is likely to be an expanding demand in the country.

 6

 2.16 An increase in export volume at an annual rate of over 8 per cent is an
essential condition for sustained viability of the country’s external payments.
Government have recently farther simplified procedures and liberalised facilities for
exporters. The procedures for payment of cash assistance and duty drawback have
been made simpler. Rates of cash assistance have been suitably revised in order to
promote the competitiveness of our exports. The country’s success in stabilising
domestic price levels and the emergence of a buyers’ market at home have also enhanced
the competitiveness of our exports. The fact that a year in which the volume of world
trade declined is likely to witness an increase of 7 to 8 per cent in the volume of our
exports is an indication of the growing effectiveness of our export promotion efforts.
The modernisation programme for jute, textiles and sugar, I have mentioned earlier, is
designed to strengthen further the country’s export performance. The recent arrangement
to delink the rupee from the pound and determine the rupee’s exchange rate by reference
to movements in a basket of currencies of India’s major trading partners is designed
to impart greater stability to the effective exchange rate and to our foreign trade in a
world of floating currencies. With its well diversified industrial base, it to possible, as
never before, for India to mount a successful export drive.
 2.17 Developments in science and technology have convincingly demonstrated
that mass poverty is not the inevitable lot of the majority of mankind. The country has
an impressive record of achievement in the utilisation of atomic energy, space
exploration, and utilisation of modern science for agricultural development. The time
has, however, come when the movement for technological change needs a fresh impetus.
As part of this process, the Plan allocation for the development of science and
technology will be Rs.156 crores in 1976-77 or an increase of no less than 34 per cent
over the likely expenditure of Rs.116 crores in the current year. Hon’ble Members
would no doubt also welcome Government’s decision to levy an R&D cess to mobilise
resources to finance such ventures. The Ministry of Industry and Civil Supplies would
be introducing legislation in this regard in this session.
 2.18 Social justice to not merely a matter of increased production even higher
production is an indispensable condition for securing greater social justice. That to
why our development strategy has always recognised the need for special programmes
catering to the needs of the more vulnerable sections of our society. The 20-point
Economic Programme has created a new awareness of the urgency of orderly
implementation of such programmes. Effective implementation of measures involving
redistribution of surplus land, provision of house sites for the poor and socialisation
of vacant urban lands will have a very favourable impact on the structure of income
distribution. Progress in this field is proceeding apace. The more vigorous emphasis
now being laid on family planning also constitutes an important element of the
programme designed to improve the standard of living and the quality of life of the
less privileged sections of our society. New initiatives are being planned to step up
considerably the a of construction of low income houses as part of programmes of
sound urban development and renewal. However, I would like to emphasise that special
 7

programmes of this kind achieve optimum results when they form part of an integrated
strategy of development.
 2.19 Government recognise that if the process of development to to be speeded
up and plans and programmes are to be properly implemented. some basic a are also
necessary in the field of financial administration. The existing system under which
accounts are maintained by an agency external to the Ministries and Departments to
not conducive to effective financial management. Accounts and Finance should form
an integral part of overall management and should play a more meaningful and effective
role in selection of projects, allocation of funds, monitoring of expenditure in relation
to physical progress, and evaluation of results. In order to integrate accounts with
administrative Ministries and Departments, it is proposed to separate accounts from
audit and instal a Departmentalised Accounting System. The process of this separation
is scheduled to be completed by 1st October. 1976 for all Central Ministries. Under
the new scheme, administrative Ministries will take full responsibility for arranging
payments, and timely compilation and rendering of accounts. This reform will facilitate
the timely receipt of information on the progress of expenditure, and enable a proper
analysts of expenditure trends to be effected. There can be little doubt that this flow
of information will greatly facilitate the taking of correct decisions, and the adoption
of remedial measures wherever called for. Since these changes are fundamental, and
of a magnitude unprecedented in the annals of Indian administration, care has to be
taken to ensure that during the transitional phase, there to no dislocation either in
payments or in accounting procedures. Hon’ble Members are doubtless aware that the
President has promulgated two Ordinances to achieve these objectives, and to ensure
that the necessary expert manpower to available to the Government for discharging
the newly acquired responsibilities. In doing so, every care will be taken to see that
minimum hardship to caused to the employees, and that the Comptroller and Auditor
General is able to discharge his constitutional responsibilities effectively and without
disruption. He is fully associated with the reforms and all measures have been taken
in close consultation with him.
 2.20 Government also attach great importance to the rationalisation and
modernisation of procedures relating to the personal claims of Government servants
and transactions with members of the public. The existing procedures in regard to
pension, gratuity and, drawal of salaries of Government officers have been reviewed
in depth and a number of steps have been taken to eliminate existing delays in the
preparation of pension papers and sanctioning of pension and gratuity. Procedures for
payment of salary and allowances of Gazetted Government servants have also been
simplified. It to proposed to utilise nationalised banks for financial transactions between
Government, its employees and private citizens. The new system will be a considerable
improvement over the exesting system where such transactions can today be made
only at a limited number of treasuries or banks..
 8

 2.21 The machinery for tax collection, for checking tax evasion, and for
preventing leakage of foreign exchange to illegal channels has been streamlined. The
improved collection of income tax, despite a reduction in rates, the outstanding success
of the voluntary disclosure scheme, and the sizeable increase in earnings of foreign
exchange on invisible account due to effective action a smuggling, are an indication
of the success of measures to strengthen the tax collection machinery. I would like to
take this opportunity to express my appreciation of the work dons by the staff of the
Central Boards of Direct Taxes and of Excise and me, of the Directorate of Revenue
intelligence and the Directorate of enforcement
 2.22 I would like to point out that prevention of such evils as tax evasion and
black money cannot be achieved solely through a tightening of administrative
mechanisms. It is equally essential to ensure that our economic policies, including our
fiscal policies, minimise the incentives for tax evasion and for generation of black
money. As part of this drive, Government have sought to streamline and simplify
controls with a view to removing those which have become obsolete or lost relevance,
without in any way encouraging greater concentration of economic power. The recent
attempts at simplification of procedures and liberalisation of facilities for inward flow
of remittances from non-resident Indians abroad are directed to the same objective.
Such simplification and liberalisation cannot however be a once and for all process.
Some controls will always remain an essential part of our regulatory mechanism for
the public good, and have to be accepted as necessary facts of life. Nevertheless, there
is clearly a need for continuous efforts to make our control mechanisms, where these
are necessary, more effective, to streamline their operations, to identify the broad
objectives behind each control instrument, and to see if those objectives are really
being served or whether an alternative arrangement would not be superior.
 2.23 I believe I have said enough to give Hon’ble Members an idea of the
underlying objectives and policies of the Budget for 1976-77. It is now time for me to
describe briefly the Revised Estimates for 1975-76 and the main features of the Budget
Estimates for 1976-77.
REVISED ESTIMATES FOR 1975-76
 3.1 The original Budget for 1975-76 envisaged a deficit of its. 247 crores.
However, due to certain unavoidable increases in expenditure, the current year to now
expected to end with a deficit of a higher order. A large part of the additional expenditure
involved represents deliberate action on the part of Government designed to accelerate
the pace of economic growth.
 3.2 Because of recessionary conditions prevailing in international markets, it
became necessary to intensify export promotion measures. As a result, expenditure on
export promotion schemes to expected to exceed the original Budget Estimates of
Rs.88 crores by Rs.71 crores.
 9

 3.3 Public sector undertakings have greatly improved their working, but some
of them, particularly the National Textile Corporation, could not generate enough
funds to meet all their obligations. As a result, non- Plan budgetary support for these
public sector units had to be increased by Rs.210 crores over the Budget provision of
Rs.170 crores.
 3.4 Taking advantage of the increased production of food grains, Government
have decided to build up an adequate level of buffer stocks. Budgetary support of the
order of Rs.130 crores had to be provided to the Food Corporation of India for this
purpose - Rs.100 crores as equity capital and Re. 30 crores as loan. The House will
agree that this is a worthwhile investment.
 3.5 The original Budget provided for a net outgo of its. 140 crores on account
of fertiliser transactions. However, as Hon’ble Members are aware. the pool prices of
fertilisers were reduced in July, 1975 and again in December, 1975 in order to boost
consumption. For this reason, as also the slow initial oft-take and consequent lag in
recoveries, the net outgo on this account is now expected to increase by Rs.173 crores.
 3.6 Defence expenditure will be higher by Rs.136 crores due mainly to grant
of additional dearness allowance and an upward revision of ration and other
allowances. The additional instalments of dearness allowance sanctioned in
September, 1975, for which no provision was made at the Budget stage, have cast an
extra burden of a considerable magnitude which to reflected in the Revised Estimates
under other heads also.
 3.7 In spite of the burden cast on the Budget by these commitments, we did
not allow our developmental efforts to suffer. Investments in the crucial sectors of the
Plan, especially steel, shipping and transport as also mines, fertilisers, coal and power,
were stepped up beyond the level provided in the Budget for 1975-76. The outlay on
health and family planning has also become significantly higher. Additional funds
have been provided to the Railways to enable them to meet the shortfall in their
resources for the Plan which has been stepped up. In this context, I should like to
make special mention of the extra provision of its. 53 crores for purchase of rolling
stock by the Railways, which was also a means of providing stimulus to the engineering
industry. In sum, the budgetary provision for various sectors of the Central Plan will
be about Rs.270 crores more than was provided for in the original Budget.
 3.8 Budgetary support for the Plans of States and Union territories was
originally fixed at Rs.1054 crores which included a sum of Rs.100 crores for special
assistance to certain States with gaps in their resources to ensure adequate investment
in important projects in the core sectors of irrigation and power. A subsequent
assessment of the States’ resources revealed that these gaps would be of a higher order
than earlier envisaged. As a result, provision for special assistance had to be raised to
Rs.175 crores. Following the announcement of the New Economic Programme,
additional Central assistance of Rs.85 crores was allocated to the States to enable
 10

them to step up the outlays on selected irrigation and power projects. Certain States
like Bihar, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat and Rajasthan have suffered on account of
heavy rains and floods. A sum of Rs.37 crores has had to be provided as advance plan
assistance to enable them to cope with the resulting problems. In all, the Central
assistance to State and Union territories Plans will go up by Rs.198 crores.
 3.9 At this stage it is necessary to state that the budgetary deficit, taking into
account all the inescapable additional commitments, would have been much higher
but for a significant increase in resource mobilisation.
 3.10 As a result of stringent action taken against tax evasion, an atmosphere
has been created whereby tax-payers have a greater respect for the law, and tax
compliance has improved. The fact must be faced that in the past a considerable part
of income and wealth had escaped taxation. After careful consideration, Government
decided to provide those who had indulged in tax evasion a last chance to mend their
ways. Accordingly, a scheme of voluntary disclosure of income and wealth, was
announced for a limited period. Disclosures, and consequently tax collections, under
this, scheme have surpassed our original expectations. The Exchequer has also benefited
by way of larger collection of taxes as a result both of improved tax collections and
greater buoyancy of the economy. All these factors will result in an improvement of
Rs.660 crores in tax revenues as compared to the Budget Estimates inclusive of the
States’ share. The benefit due to the larger collection of income tax will, however,
accrue mainly to the State Governments, and their share -of taxes will go up by nearly
Rs.226 crores.
 3.11 The receipts from market loans, which now include investment of a part
of the voluntarily disclosed income and wealth in specified securities, will be higher
than Budget Estimates by Rs.168 crores.
 3.12 Receipts from external assistance are expected to exceed the Budget
Estimates by Rs.554 crores; this figure includes Rs.204 crores of assistance
received during the current year from Iran for the Kudremukh Project and for
economic development.
 3.13 In spite of improvements in receipts mentioned above, the current year is
expected to end with a budgetary deficit of Rs.490 crores. I should however add that
the budgetary deficit of Rs.490 crores could have been Rs.100 crores lower had we
taken advantage of the special borrowing to that extent from the Reserve Bank of
India envisaged in the original Budget.
 IV
BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR 1976-77
 4.1 The most important feature of the Budget for 1976-77 is a further
significant step up in investment so that the country may move forward rapidly towards
the realisation of the objective of accelerated growth with social justice.

 11

 4.2 Gross tax revenues at the existing rates of taxation are expected to amount
to Rs.7837 crores, showing an increase of Rs.367 crores as compared to the Revised
Estimates for 1975-76. Of the additional accruals of Rs.367 crores, the share of the
Centre would be Rs.346 crores. Receipts from Customs are likely to go up by Rs.113
crores as imports next year are expected to be larger in view of the step up in Plan
investments, and the need for larger maintenance imports to sustain higher production
levels. Union Excise duties are expected to yield Rs.261 crores more than in the
current year. Income tax receipts will be less by Rs.103 crores, mainly because the
bulk of the receipts under the voluntary disclosure scheme will have been realised in
the current year.
 4.3 Market loans are expected to yield Rs.535 crores as compared to Rs.453
crores in the current year. This excludes investments under the voluntary disclosure
scheme. Small savings collections are also expected to yield Rs.40 crores more in the
next year.
 4.4 Receipts from external assistance are estimated at Rs.1341 crores which
include assistance both in the pipeline and disbursement against new commitments.
 4.5 On the expenditure side, the provision for Defence expenditure is Rs.2544
crores against Rs.2410 crores in Revised Estimates for 1975-76, which is a small
increase. The provision for food subsidy will be Rs.300 crores as against Rs.250
crores In the current year. From 1st March 1976, fertiliser transactions have been put
on a different footing. The Food Corporation of India will pay the Government for the
imported fertiliser and arrange for its distribution. Other non-Plan expenditures are
being restricted to the minimum so as to make available the maximum possible resources
for the Plan.
 4.6 Government have been concerned about the difficulties being faced by
pensioners in recent years in the wake of inflation. The last instalment of relief to
them on account of the increase in the cost of living was with effect from 1st April,
1974. Considering the subsequent increase in the cost of living, and keeping in view
the resources available, I propose to allow them an additional ad hoc relief to the
extent of 10 per cent of pension, subject to a minimum of Rs.10 and a maximum of
Rs.50. I also propose to extend to family pensioners the relief earlier granted, as well
as the further relief now proposed to be granted, to pensioners. These benefits will
take effect from 1st October, 1975. A provision of Rs.37 crores is being made in the
next year’s Budget for this purpose.
 4.7 I now turn to the Plan outlay for 1976-77. The allocations from the Central
Budget for the Central, State and Union territories Plans will be Rs.4759 crores. This
includes Rs.1412 crores for Central assistance for State Plan and provisions for Union
territories Plan, the sub-Plan of the Hills and Tribal Areas, the requirements of North
Eastern Council, and assistance for power schemes channelled through the Rural
Electrification Corporation. The allocations also include Rs.294 crores of special
 12

advance Plan assistance without which some States would be without adequate
resources for the required level of investment in important projects in the core sectors
of irrigation and power. The budgetary provision for the Central Plan will be Rs.3347
crores. The total Central Plan outlay in 1976-77, including internal and other resources
of public sector undertakings, will be Rs.4090 crores, as against Rs.3154 crores in
1975-76. The State and Union territories Plans will be of the order of Rs.3762 crores,
as compared to Rs.2812 crores in 1975-76. The greatest stress has been laid on the
completion of on-going projects in agriculture, irrigation, power, petroleum, coal,
fertilisers, steel, transport and communications. We have had to be rather selective in
proposing new starts, having regard to resources in sight.
 4.8 The Central Budget provides Rs.323 crores for agriculture and allied
programmes. Special emphasis is being laid on production programmes with an area
approach such as the Drought Prone Areas Programme, the Command Area
Development Programme, special programmes for small and marginal farmers, and
agricultural labour and schemes to increase generally the availability of inputs and
credit for agriculture. The Central outlays will be supplemented by outlays in the State
and Union territories Plans to the extent of Rs.473 crores, of which about Rs.148
crores will be for minor irrigation schemes. The area covered by minor irrigation is
expected to increase by one million hectares in 1976-77.
 4.9 Provision in the Central Budget for irrigation and flood control will be
Rs.20 crores including an outlay of Rs.12 crores for flood control schemes. The State
and Union territories Plans will provide Rs.673 crores for major and medium irrigation
and flood control. As Hon’ble Members are aware, in pursuance of the 20-point
Programme, we have proposed to bring an additional five million hectares under major
and medium irrigation during the Plan period. As against this target, the investment
proposed next year will create additional potential of the order of one million hectares.
 4.10 A sum of Rs.129 crores has been provided in the Central Budget for
power development, including Rs.74 crores for Central thermal and hydel power
schemes, and inter- State transmission lines, and Rs.55 crores for nuclear power projects.
There will also be a significant step up in the outlay on power in State and Union
territories Plans from Rs.983 crores in 1975- 76 to Rs.12 90 crores in 1976-77. The
target for additional power generation capacity next year will be of the order of 2500
MW, as against the achievement of about 1800 MW in the current year.
 4.11 The need for developing indigenous sources of energy cannot be over-
emphasised. Accordingly, the budgetary support for petroleum and petro-chemicals
has been stepped up from Rs.170 crores in 1975-76 to Rs.274 crores in 1976-77, of
which Rs.73 crores will go to the 011 and Natural Gas Commission to maintain the
tempo of onshore exploration and for stepping up the pace of offshore exploration.
Indigenous production of crude oil is expected to increase to at least 9 million tonnes
in 1976-77 as against 8.2 million tonnes in the current year. The production from
 13

off-shore sources by the end of this period will be at a daily rate amounting to 2
million tonnes annually. An additional Rs.65 crores is being provided to the Indian
Oil Corporation for the Koyali Refinery expansion the Salaya Viramgam Koyali
Pipeline, the Mathura Refinery and the Viramgam-Mathura Pipeline. The Indian
Petro-Chemicals Corporation will be provided Rs.81 crores for the petrochemical
complex comprising the Naphtha Cracker and downstream units. The total Plan
outlay in the petroleum sector will be Rs.485 crores in 1976-77 as compared with
Rs.368 crores in the current year.
 4.12 It is indeed a matter of great satisfaction that after the nationalisation of
the coal industry and as a result of the concerted steps taken by Government, production
of coal has increased rapidly. Budgetary allocation for coal in 1976-77 will be Rs.277
crores as against Rs.229 crores in 1975-76. It is expected that the production of coal
will go up from 98 million tonnes in 1975-76 to 108 million tonnes in 1976-77.
 4.13 Fertilisers being a critical input for agricultural production, budgetary
provision for this sector is being stepped up from Rs.290 crores in 1975-76 to Rs.434
crores in the next year. This includes Rs.171 crores for the Bhatinda and Panipat
projects and Rs.13 crores for the Phulpur fertiliser project which is in the cooperative
sector. Adequate provision has been made to enable on-going projects to be completed
according to schedule. In the current year the public sector fertiliser units have improved
their production in nutrient terms by about 50 per cent as compared to last year and
their production next year may well exceed 1.1 million tonnes.
 4.14 The budgetary allocation for the steel sector is being doubled to Rs.402
crores in the next year. Of this, Rs.119 crores will be for the Bhilai Complex etc. and
Rs.150 crores for Bokaro. The Kudremukh Iron Ore Project, which is being financed
wholly with Iranian assistance, has been provided Rs.100 crores for project construction
and the related facilities required in the Mangalore Port. This is a wholly export-
oriented project for supplying iron ore concentrate for the iranian steel industry.
 4.15 The allocation for the transport and communications sector will be Rs.597
crores, of which Rs.271 crores will be for Railways which have their own Plan of
Rs.411 crores. The Rallways will also need loan support of Rs.160 crores to enable
them to meet their current obligations to the General Revenues.
 4.16 The budgetary allocation for industry includes Rs.36 crores for the
Hindustan Paper Corporation for its Nowgong, Cachar, Nagaland and Kerala projects,
and Rs.20 crores for Cement Corporation projects. Rs.10 crores are being provided
for investment and transport subsidy for promotion of industries in backward areas.
 4.17 The allocation for khadi, for village industries, and for small scale industries
is R8.52 crores.

 14

 4.18 Outlays on social services also have been increased. Provisions for
education, scientific research, health, family planning and integrated urban development
are all higher than in the current year. In particular, the Central allocation for tribal
sub-Plans has been doubled to Rs.40 crores, and that for Hill Areas development has
been stepped up to Rs.36 crores from Rs.2 0 crores in 1975-76.
 4.19 As Hon’ble Members are aware, industrial workers and salaried
employees were the worst hit by rise in prices. It was with a view to protect the real
incomes of these vulnerable groups that several anti- inflationary measures were
implemented in 1974-75. One of these measures was the impounding of half of
dearness allowance increases. It is now necessary to consolidate the gains we have
secured. The large step up in the next year’s Plan outlay would generate new
employment opportunities, and also safeguard existing jobs. At the same time, this
calls for a careful vigil on money supply expansion so that inflationary forces are
kept at bay. In view of this, Government have decided that impounding of half of
dearness allowance increases will continue for one year beyond July, 1976 when the
present statutory provisions in this regard expire. Deposits made during the extended
period will be used for the Plan. The amounts deposited will earn interest at the
same rate as before i.e., 12.5 per cent and will be repaid in five equal annual
instalments, inclusive of interest, into the provident fund of the subscribers
commencing from July, 1978. Necessary legislation for this will be introduced in
this session. Government will, however, abide by its assurance and repay the
instalments of the additional wages and dearness allowances already impounded
and falling due in accordance with the existing scheme. The employees will, therefore,
*have larger disposable incomes to the tune of Rs.270 crores during 1976-77.
 4.20 The welfare of industrial workers has always been of special concern to
the Government. A number of social security schemes for industrial workers are in
operation. Hon’ble Members are already familiar with the details of the E.S.I. Scheme,
the E.P.F. Scheme and the more recent Family Pension- cum- Life Assurance Scheme.
I am happy to announce that it has been decided to introduce yet another social security
scheme which will provide insurance to workers without any payment on their part.
The salient features of this scheme are that in the event of the demise of a worker
while in service, his dependents would be entitled to an additional payment equivalent
to the average balance in the provident fund of the worker during the preceding three
years subject to a maximum of Rs.10, 000. This scheme would apply to all subscribers
who have maintained a minimum balance of Rs.1,000 during the preceding three
years. It has been estimated that the average balance of a worker would be around
Rs.3, 500. This would be indicative of the level of relief that will be available. The
burden of financing this scheme will be shared by Government with employers. I am
sure all sections of this House would welcome this new measure. Necessary legislation
will be introduced by the Labour Ministry.

 15

 4.21 Taking into account the likely magnitude of expenditure and resources in
sight, the Central Budget for 1976-77 shows a deficit of Rs.368 crores at existing
levels of taxation.
