 1




 Budget 1993-94
 Speech of
 Shri Manmohan Singh
 Minister of Finance
 27th February, 1993

 PART A
Sir,
 I rise to present the budget for 1993-94.
 2 . It is now twenty months since our government took office: twenty eventful
months in which we have worked ceaselessly to overcome the very difficult economic
situation we inherited. In June, 1991, the economy was in the throes of an
unprecedented balance of payments crisis. A savage squeeze had been imposed on
imports; international confidence had collapsed; industrial production was falling;
and inflation was on the rise.
 3 . The sense of crisis is now behind us. We have restored a measure of
normalcy to our external payments. The annual rate of inflation has been reduced
from the peak of 17% in August, 1991 to below 7%. International confidence has
been restored. Agriculture has performed well in the current year and industrial
production is beginning to recover. The growth of the economy, which had declined
to 1.2% in 1991-92, is expected to be around 4% in 1992-93. The economic strategy
we have followed, resting on the twin pillars of fiscal discipline and structural
reform, has been vindicated by the decisive upturn.
 4 . Fiscal discipline was necessary because the government had lived for too
long beyond its means. The rising fiscal deficits of the Central Government were
the root cause of our balance of payments problem, rising prices and high rates of
interest. We have made good progress by reducing the fiscal deficit from 8.4% of
GDP in 1990-91 to about 5% in the current year.
 5 . Policies of structural reform aimed at increasing efficiency in resource
use and improving our international competitiveness were crucial for providing a
lasting solution to the payments crisis. It was necessary to restructure our trade
and industrial policies, encourage efficiency through greater domestic competition,
allow our producers to have access to imports at reasonable rates of duty, encourage
foreign investment and upgradation of technology, and progressively integrate the
Indian economy with the world economy. Without these reforms, India would face
the certain prospect of entering the 21st century as just about the poorest country

 1

 2
in Asia. I am convinced that the Indian people would never tolerate such an outcome.
India’s natural and human resources entitle us to think in terms of becoming a
major powerhouse of the world economy. Our reforms are inspired precisely by this
vision.
 6 . The policy initiatives we have taken do not in any way reduce our
commitment to take care of the poor and the disadvantaged. On the contrary, we
have taken steps to minimise the burden of adjustment on the poor and working
classes. We have disproved those professional prophets of gloom who were predicting
millions of people becoming unemployed.
 7 . When we embarked on this path, we knew that the benefit of our policies
would only be seen after three to four years. Patience is therefore essential.
Nevertheless, Honourable Members can take comfort that the early results are
certainly encouraging. Inflation is down and production is beginning to recover.
Fears of being swamped by imports as a consequence of liberalisation have proved
to be grossly exaggerated. Despite the virtual removal of import licensing in 1992-
93, total imports in 1992-93 in US dollars are likely to be lower than in 1990-91.
Although the rupee has been floated for most current account transactions, the
market exchange rate has remained relatively stable. The investment climate has
improved considerably. Corporate capital issues by non-Government public limited
companies in April-October, 1992 were 67 percent higher than in the same period
of the previous year. Loans sanctioned by financial institutions in the first ten
months of 1992-93 were 49% higher than in the same period of the previous year.
Foreign investors are showing active interest in investment in many sectors, including
critical infrastructure sectors such as power and petroleum. Since August 1991
the approvals given for foreign investment proposals upto the end of January amount
to an equity investment of $ 2.3 billion. These are of course only approvals at this
stage and actual flows will take time to materialise, but they certainly indicate a
substantial potential for larger investment inflows in the future.
 8 . Nevertheless, there is no room for complacency. Fiscal imbalances are
still large. The efficiency and resource generating capacity of public sector enterprises
are still very inadequate. Inflationary expectations have not yet been purged from
the system and inflationary pressure could easily build up again if fiscal discipline
is relaxed. The economy is still vulnerable to external shocks and loss of confidence.
The riots and disturbances in December and January have also taken their toll, by
disrupting domestic production and exports and by casting doubts about the stability
of our polity and society and our determination to persevere with the difficult task
of economic reform. We can ill afford such doubts.
 9 . The priorities for economic policy, at this critical stage of our economic
restructuring, are very clear:
 · We must continue with the fiscal correction to ensure that inflationary
 expectations are effectively curbed; to this end, the fiscal deficit both at
 the Centre and in the States must be further reduced as a percentage of
 G D P.
 · The room for fiscal maneuver gained by restraining expenditure over the
 past two years must be used to give a strong fillip to development
 expenditure in 1993-94, especially for programmes of poverty alleviation,

 3
 rural development and the vital social services such as education and
 health.
 · The hesitant industrial recovery must be converted into a strong revival in
 1993-94, which can then be followed by a vigorous boom in the last three
 years of the Eighth Plan.
 · We must make further progress with our announced strategy of tax reform,
 moving to a simpler tax system, with moderate rates and much greater
 focus on compliance.
 · We must ensure that our economic strategy gives full support to agriculture
 on which the livelihood and well being of the majority of our people depend,
 and also to agro-processing industries, which have a tremendous potential
 for increasing employment and income in rural areas.
 · Finally, exports must be made a truly high priority national endeavour so
 that we can move as quickly as possible to managing the balance of
 payments without the need for continued exceptional financing from
 abroad. This is the only meaningful route to self-reliance.
 1 0 . The expenditure and tax proposals for 1993-94, which I will be presenting
shortly, have been tailored to meet these objectives.
 1 1 . Adequate availability of credit at reasonable rates of interest will be critical
in converting this year’s weak industrial recovery into a strong revival next year.
One factor behind the inadequacy of credit for the commercial sector is the
preemption of a large proportion of banks’ resources by the government at below-
market rates of interest through the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR). In 1992-93 we
began the process of reducing the SLR in order to release a larger volume of resources
for commercial lending. Our objective is to reduce the SLR further from an effective
average level of about 36 percent at present to about 25% over the next 3 years.
The precise phasing of the reduction will be announced by Reserve Bank of India,
taking into account the emerging aggregate monetary and credit situation.
 1 2 . The reduction in inflation achieved thus far justifies a reduction in interest
rates. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank of India is separately notifying a reduction in
the maximum interest rate on bank deposits from 12% to 11%. Simultaneously,
the minimum lending rate of 18% on commercial advances is being lowered to
17%. It is my expectation that the lowering of interest rates will help the economic
recovery in the coming year. As inflation abates, there will be scope for further
reduction in interest rates.
 1 3 . No economic strategy can succeed in our country which does not recognise
the central role of agriculture in supporting broad-based and equitable development.
The government is firmly committed to ensuring that agriculture, agro-processing
and rural development are given top priority in the design of economic policy.
 1 4 . A major instrument for encouraging agricultural production and making
it profitable is the assurance of remunerative prices to the farmers. Procurement
prices for the last kharif crop and the forthcoming rabi have been handsomely
raised to ensure that farmers are compensated for increases in the cost of inputs.
It is also the policy of the Government not to place administrative restrictions on

 4
movements of agricultural products within the country. Our farmers must have
the full benefit of prices available in the domestic market.
 1 5 . Agricultural credit is another critical input for agricultural, and more
broadly, rural development. The flow of rural credit from institutional sources is
expected to jump from Rs.13,800 crore during 1992-93 to Rs.16,500 crore during
1993-94, an increase of 20%. NABARD’s investment refinance support to banks
will increase by 22% from Rs.2,300 crore in the current year to Rs.2,800 crore in
1993-94. Within this total, NABARD has evolved an innovative package of measures
to ensure special attention to priority areas. Term loans for minor irrigation will
support the sinking of 3.75 lakh wells and installation of 6 lakh pump sets. The
rate of NABARD refinance of bank loans is being increased to 90% in the case of
North Eastern States and also of investments in 100% export oriented units in
agriculture and allied activities. NABARD will also take up pilot projects for intensive
development of rural industries in five selected districts with an outlay of Rs.125
crore. NABARD is setting up a Venture Capital Fund, with an initial corpus of Rs.5
crore, to assist new and innovative investments in farm and non-farm sectors, and
a Cooperative Development Fund with an initial corpus of Rs.10 crore to help
improve management systems and skills in cooperative banks. In 1993-94, we
shall pay special attention to revitalising the agricultural credit system so that it
becomes a more effective instrument for increasing capital formation and productivity
of agriculture.
 1 6 . Our strategy of gradually reducing the high levels of protection to Indian
industry, and integrating our economy with the world economy, will clearly help
Indian agriculture. It will moderate the high industrial prices which the farmer has
to pay. It will also ensure a more competitive exchange rate, at which our agricultural
and agro-based exports will be much more profitable. I venture to suggest to
Honourable Members that in the medium run, these changes will be far more
significant in favouring agricultural producers than any programme of special
subsidies could ever be.
 1 7 . In my Budget speech last year I had indicated that the Government
intended to implement the recommendations of the Narasimham Committee on
financial sector reform in stages. The securities scam which was discovered in
April 1992 has revealed certain weaknesses which add urgency to the need for
financial sector reform. A major reform initiated last year was the introduction of
new norms for income recognition, and provisioning for bad debts and the
prescription of new capital adequacy requirements in line with internationally
accepted Basle Committee norms. The new norms will ensure that the books of the
banks will reflect their financial position more accurately and in accordance with
internationally accepted accounting practices. These changes will improve our ability
to evaluate the performance of the banks and will also make for more effective
bank supervision.
 1 8 . Because of the new norms, however, banks will have to make large
provisions amounting to over Rs.10,000 crore for bad and doubtful advances in
their portfolios. As the provisioning norms are being introduced in two stages, the
first impact will be felt in the year ending 31 March 1993, with a further impact
next year. The resulting losses will eat into the capital of the banks, which is
already inadequate given the new capital adequacy norms. In order to protect the

 5
viability and financial health of the Indian banking system I am making provision
for a large capital contribution of Rs.5,700 crore to the nationalised banks in 1993-
94 to meet the gap created by the application of the first stage of the provisioning
norms. There will be no immediate net outgo from the budget, as the Government’s
contribution is in the form of Government bonds; but the interest payment on
these bonds, and their ultimate redemption will be a real burden on the budget in
future. This is the price we have to pay for having long tolerated management
practices in the banks and types of lending which paid inadequate attention to
portfolio quality and recoveries. I may add that while undertaking such a large
injection of capital into the banks, specific commitments will be required from each
bank to ensure that their future management practices ensure a high level of
portfolio quality so that the earlier problem does not recur.
 1 9 . Even this large injection of capital will only solve the immediate problem.
Additional losses will arise because of the second stage of provisioning next year.
Besides, the capital adequacy requirements are also being introduced in a phased
manner and there will be additional capital needs on this account in 1994-95 and
1995-96. This burden cannot be borne entirely by the budget without eating into
scarce resources which are desperately needed for development, especially in the
rural areas. Government has, therefore, decided that the State Bank of India, as
well as other nationalised banks which are in a position to do so, will be allowed to
access the capital markets to raise fresh equity to meet their shortfall in capital
requirements over the next three years. The additional capital thus moblised will
help our banks to expand their lending which would otherwise be constrained by
capital inadequacy. Government will, continue to retain majority ownership, and
therefore effective control, in the public sector banks. Necessary legislation to give
effect to this decision will be introduced later in the year.
 2 0 . If banks are to make provisions for bad debts, they must also be able to
realise the security on their bad debts. At present the legal process for realising
bank dues is tortuous, and cases take several years in the courts. Government
has, therefore, decided to set up Special Tribunals to expedite legal action by the
banks to enforce recoveries. Legislation to this effect will be introduced in the
course of the year.
 2 1 . The securities scam has also revealed weaknesses in the existing system
of supervision of banks. Following the recommendations of the Narasimham
Committee, Reserve Bank of India has decided to strengthen its supervisory
arrangements by setting up a separate Board for Financial Supervision within the
Reserve Bank.
 2 2 . Parallel with reforms in the banking system we are vigorously pursuing
reforms in the capital markets. We must ensure that trading and settlement take
place with speed and transparency under appropriate rules and regulations designed
to ensure investor protection. The Securities and Exchange Board of India, which
was given statutory status and powers twelve months ago, has been entrusted with
the task of bringing about this transition. As promised in my last Budget speech,
the office of the Controller of Capital Issues in the Ministry of Finance has been
abolished, and almost all powers under the Securities Contract (Regulations) Act
have been delegated or transferred to SEBI.

 6
 2 3 . Several important steps have been taken in the current year to reform the
capital market. Rules and regulations have been notified to deal with insider trading,
the operation of mutual funds, registration of brokers, merchant bankers and other
intermediaries. The scheme for allowing Foreign Institutional Investors to invest in
the capital markets announced in my last Budget speech has been implemented
and a number of approvals given. Several private sector mutual funds have recently
been given clearances by SEBI. A company has been incorporated for the
establishment of a National Stock Exchange which is expected to operate as a
model stock exchange with member brokers all over the country trading in the
exchange through modern telecommunication facilities. Proposals are also being
considered for the establishment of a centralised depository with a National Clearance
and Settlement System.
 2 4 . We are determined to ensure that further reforms of the capital market
are implemented in the course of 1993-94 so that the capital market can mobilise
large funds for investment. On the basis of experience gained, the Government has
decided to amend the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act to give SEBI
additional powers in order to increase its effectiveness.
 2 5 . With reforms underway in the banking sector and in the capital markets,
it is necessary to address the need for similar reforms in the insurance industry
aimed at introducing a more competitive environment subject to suitable regulation
and supervision. I propose to appoint a High Powered Committee to go into these
issues in depth and submit its recommendations within six months.
 2 6 . In my Budget speech last year, I announced the introduction of a new
system of exchange rate management under which a dual exchange rate regime
was introduced, and import licensing was eliminated on most items of capital
goods, raw materials, intermediates and components. These items became freely
importable against foreign exchange purchased in the market. The system has
worked fairly well and the market exchange rate has been remarkably stable. The
existence of a dual rate, however, hurts exporters and other foreign exchange earners
who have to surrender 40% of their earnings at the official rate, getting the benefit
of the higher market rate on only 60 percent. Many exporters have said that this
amounts to a tax on exporters of goods and services whose continuation cannot be
justified at a time when exports must receive our fullest support. There is merit in
this point of view, and the experience of the past year gives ground for confidence
that we can unify the exchange rate and still manage the balance of payments with
a reasonable degree of stability in the exchange rate. The Government has therefore
decided to eliminate the dual rate arrangement. All exporters, as well as other
foreign exchange earners such as our workers abroad, will henceforth be allowed
to convert 100% of their earnings at the market rate. All imports will also henceforth
have to be paid for at the market rate. The details of the new system are being
notified separately by Reserve Bank of India. I expect that this will give a major
boost to exports, and will further encourage foreign exchange flows into official
channels.
 2 7 . Several other steps are also being taken to stimulate exports. The Commerce
Ministry is reviewing the list of items whose exports are subject to one or other
restriction with a view to removing as many restrictions as possible. Reserve Bank
of India is taking steps to ensure that adequate credit will be available for exports.
Banks have already been asked to ensure that export credit amounts to at least

 7
10% of their total advances. The interest rate on rupee export credit is being reduced
by one percentage point. As a further measure of support for exports, the interest
tax will be waived in the case of export credit from banks. I will have more to say
on incentives for exporters when I come to the tax proposals in the Budget.
 2 8 . A new policy towards foreign investment has been an integral part of our
strategy of modernising the economy, and establishing global linkages which will
be of critical importance in the emerging world economy. I have already mentioned
that the initiatives taken in this area thus far have yielded encouraging results. I
have no doubt that as our reforms proceed and gain momentum, we can expect to
attract a substantial share of the private investment that is presently flowing to
many developing countries in Asia. The Government has signed the Multilateral
Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) convention and we expect to join MIGA formally
as soon as membership procedures are completed. Several countries, including the
UK, Germany and the United States, have expressed an interest in signing bilateral
investment treaties. The Government has indicated a willingness to enter into
bilateral negotiations on this issue.
 2 9 . Industrial modernisation, and especially the creation of internationally
competitive industries, requires a massive expansion of and qualitative improvement
in infrastructure. This is especially true of power generation, telecommunications
and roads. Traditionally, these areas have been the preserve of the public sector.
Substantial expansion of public investment in these areas is certainly necessary.
However, the needs of the country are far beyond the capacity of the public sector
to deliver in a reasonable time frame. The Government has, therefore, adopted a
policy of encouraging private sector involvement and participation in these areas to
supplement the efforts being made by the public sector. In order to attract such
investment it will be necessary to make changes in policies, procedures and the
regulatory framework in these sectors. The Government proposes to make such
changes as the need arises.
 3 0 . Over the past two years, we have taken several steps to remove unnecessary
bureaucratic interference in economic activity in order to create an environment in
which the energies of our people can be harnessed to maximise innovation,
production and growth. However, I am constantly told that despite liberalisation at
the policy level, our procedures in many areas remain archaic and cumbersome.
Many of our laws also need thorough review to bring them in line with the emerging
economic environment. The Government has therefore decided that a special review
group will be constituted in each Ministry to make a review of existing laws and
procedures to identify changes needed in the light of the new policies. I hope the
State Governments which have a crucial role to play in promoting development and
investment in the new environment will also take similar steps at their end.
 3 1 . Let me now turn to the revised estimates for 1992-93.
 3 2 . We have tried to maintain strict control over expenditure, but certain
increases over the Budget estimates were unavoidable. An additional provision of
Rs.1,500 crore has to be made for food, fertiliser and export subsidies. The additional
requirement of food subsidy is because of the delay in increasing issue prices to
absorb the impact of higher procurement prices. The higher provision for export
subsidy is because of settlement of claims in the pipeline for cash compensatory
support and continuance of benefits for deemed exports. In respect of fertilisers the

 8
increase is due to the reduction in prices of urea and higher input costs. In addition,
I have provided Rs.340 crore as one-time assistance to farmers for purchase of
fertilisers whose prices were decontrolled. Ministry of Home Affairs has to be provided
additional funds for meeting security-related expenditure in the wake of disturbed
conditions in certain parts of the country. While an assessment of the actual
requirements is being made, I have for the present included in the Revised Estimates
an additional provision of Rs.285 crore. If a further provision becomes inescapable,
we shall come to the House for the necessary Supplementary Grants. These and
other increases have been offset by a reduction of Rs.1,300 crore in the requirements
for loans to States against small savings collections. The decline in small savings
collections has been a matter of concern and Government has taken measures to
improve the rate of return to the investors. As a consequence, the collections have
shown an up-trend in recent months. As a result of all these developments, total
non-plan expenditure is higher by Rs.3,278 crore as compared with the budget
estimates.
 3 3 . On the plan side, there is an increase in budgetary support for the Central
Plan for certain sectors. An additional provision of Rs.630 crore is being made for
the National Renewal Fund, which is a key element in our strategy for economic
reforms. Similarly an additional provision of Rs.250 crore has been made for
strengthening schemes in the social sectors such as Health and Family Welfare.
The provision for Rural Development is being augmented by Rs.500 crore.
 3 4 . Central assistance to State and Union Territory Plans is being augmented
by Rs.1,228 crore mainly for externally aided projects where the pace of
implementation justifies an allocation larger than in the Budget Estimates.
 3 5 . Taking Plan and non-Plan expenditures together, the total provision in
the Revised Estimates is Rs.1,24,726 crore against Rs.1,19,087 crore in the Budget
Estimates.
 3 6 . Against these additional expenditures, revenue receipts have also been
higher because of better collections and higher royalty on offshore crude oil. Capital
receipts under market loans and small savings receipts are lower than in the
Budget Estimates; but this is offset by the higher receipts from 364-days treasury
bills, which is a new instrument designed to develop a market for Government
securities.
 3 7 . The total receipts in the Revised Estimates are Rs.1,17,524 crore compared
to Rs.1,13,698 crore in the Budget Estimates. The Budget deficit is estimated at
Rs.7,202 crore and the fiscal deficit for the year is now placed at Rs.36,722 crore.
These figures are somewhat higher than envisaged in the Budget Estimates but
within tolerable limits for macro-economic stability.
 3 8 . I now turn to the Budget Estimates for 1993-94.
 3 9 . The resource constraints facing us last year imposed a tight leash on the
development programmes we could finance in 1992-93. The total size of the Central
Plan in 1992-93 (BE) was only 12.6% higher than in the previous year. With the
improvement in the fiscal situation achieved in the course of 1992-93, and the
moderation in inflation, we are now in a position to give a boost to the Plan, while
ensuring continued improvement in the fiscal deficit. Accordingly, the Central Plan
outlay for 1993-94 has been fixed at Rs.63,936 crore which is almost 32% higher
than the figure of Rs.48,407 crore in 1992-93.

 9
 4 0 . The Central Plan will be financed to the extent of Rs.23,241 crore from
budget support which is almost 26 per cent higher than the budget support of
Rs.18,501 crore in 1992-93. The balance of the Central Plan outlay of Rs.40,695
crore will be met from internal and extra-budgetary resources compared with
Rs.29,906 crore in 1992-93, representing a step-up of 36%. I am providing Rs.18,010
crore for Central assistance for States and UT Plans in 1993-94 compared to
Rs.16,111 crore in 1992-93. The total budgetary support from the Central
Government Budget to the Central and State Plans increases by almost 19% from
Rs.34,612 crore in 1992-93 to Rs.41,251 crore in 1993-94.
 4 1 . The large increase in budget support for the Plan has enabled a substantial
step-up in Central Plan programmes in the social sectors and rural development
which depend upon budgetary resources. The outlay for the Department of Rural
Development next year has been enhanced by a massive 62% to Rs.5,010 crore.
Both employment generation and capital formation in rural areas will receive a
major boost. The allocation for the Jawahar Rojgar Yojana is being increased to
Rs.3,306 crore compared with the current year ’s level of Rs.2,046 crore. This is
aimed at creating 1100 million mandays of employment. It is proposed to train 3.5
lakh young persons in rural areas under the Training of Rural Youth for Self
Employment (TRYSEM) programme. For the rural water supply programme, the
provision has been increased substantially from Rs.460 crore in 1992-93 to Rs.740
crore next year. Higher allocations have also been provided for the Integrated Rural
Development Programme. The programmes of decentralised planning and
development will receive a massive stimulus as a result of the strengthening of
Panchayati Raj institutions as envisaged in the Constitution (72nd Amendment)
Bill, 1991.
 4 2 . The development of human resources is given high priority in the Eighth
Plan; Hon’ble Members are also aware that education is an area which is very close
to my heart. I am, therefore, particularly happy to announce that the outlay for
education is being increased from Rs.952 crore to Rs.1,310 crore, which is a step
up of 37.6%. Universal provision of primary education and adult literacy of
satisfactory quality, particularly for girls and women, is a pre-requisite for the
modernisation of the economy and the society. I am happy to inform Honourable
Members that our total literacy campaigns are breaking new grounds, and are now
being implemented in 182 districts covering approximately 430 lakh adult learners.
A new scheme is being launched for the improvement of primary education in
educationally backward districts and in districts where the total literacy campaigns
have been successful, leading to an enhanced demand for primary education. In
these districts, districts specific and population specific plans for achieving
universalisation of elementary education are being prepared. Twenty to twenty-five
districts out of about 200 educationally backward districts where female literacy is
below national average, will be taken up for preparation of districts plans in 1993-
94. In the sphere of higher and technical education, modernisation and upgradation
would receive high priority. Keeping in view the aspirations of the North Eastern
region, the government has decided to set-up a university in Nagaland and an
Indian Institute of Technology in Assam
 4 3 . For Health, the provision is Rs.483 crore, which is 60% higher than the
level of Rs.302 crore in the current year ’s Budget. A major part of the provision will
be for national programmes for control of communicable and other diseases. The
Family Welfare programme is of overriding national importance; the provision under

 10
this head is being stepped up from Rs.1,000 crore for the current year to Rs.1,270
crore for the next year. A programme to improve the quality of family planning
services in Uttar Pradesh is being launched at a cost of US $ 325 million, with
assistance from USAID. In addition, with the aim of reducing maternal mortality,
under the Social Safety Net Scheme, assistance will be provided for improvement of
infrastructure at Primary Health Centres in 90 demographically backward districts.
 4 4 . The National Commission for Women set up last year is looking into various
important issues relating to women. For the integrated child development services
the provision is Rs.474 crore compared to Rs.360 crore in the current year. This
will enable us to strengthen the infrastructure set up of the scheme. The provision
for the Ministry of Welfare has been increased from Rs.530 crore to Rs.630 crore.
This includes Rs.73 crore for the liberation and rehabilitation of Safai Karmcharis.
A provision of Rs.247 crore has been made for special Central assistance for
Scheduled Castes component plan. The operations of the National Scheduled Castes
Finance and Development Corporation and the National Backward Classes Finance
and Development Corporation will be further expanded.
 4 5 . The Government regards agriculture as a sector of prime importance for
the national economy. The budgetary allocation for the plan schemes of the Ministry
of Agriculture including Animal Husbandry and Dairying is being increased by
36% from Rs.1,408 crore to Rs.1,918 crore. In addition, the bulk of the outlay on
agriculture is in the State Plans.
 4 6 . The requirements of the infrastructure sectors such as Petroleum and
Natural Gas, Power, Telecommunications, Railways and Transport have also not
been neglected. Investment programmes in these sectors are implemented through
public enterprises or departmentally run commercial undertakings and these
organisations are expected to finance their plan outlay through their internal and
extra budgetary resources. The plan outlay for Petroleum and Natural Gas has
been nearly doubled to Rs.12,114 crore from the current year ’s level of Rs.6,208
crore. The outlay for Power has been increased by 22% from Rs.5,167 crore in the
current year to Rs.6,269 crore. The outlay for Roads has been stepped up from
Rs.464 crore to Rs.593 crore. The outlay for Chemicals and Petrochemicals has
also been stepped up from Rs.763 crore to Rs.1,206 crore. The Plan outlay for the
Railways has been increased from Rs.5,700 crore to Rs.6,900 crore including
Rs.400 crore for the Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd.
 4 7 . Turning to non-Plan expenditure, I would like to draw the attention of the
House to the tremendous burden of interest payments. The provision for 1993-94
is Rs.38,000 crore compared with Rs.32,500 crore in the current year. The high
interest burden is due to the rising volume of government debt, which itself reflects
the large fiscal deficits, incurred year after year. However, with the reduction in the
fiscal deficit and hence in the Government’s borrowings, the growth of this item is
expected to decelerate sharply by 1995-96.
 4 8 . For Defence expenditure the provision has been increased from Rs.17,500
crore in the current year to Rs.19,180 crore next year. The requirements on account
of fertilisers and export subsidies will be significantly lower reflecting the impact of
the measures already taken to rationalise these subsidies. The expenditure on the
Farm Loan Waiver scheme will be Rs.500 crore; with this, the Government’s
commitment for payment under the scheme will be fulfilled. I am providing Rs.3,000

 11
crore for food subsidy as against Rs.2,800 crore in the current year. It will be the
endeavour of Government to keep the burden of food subsidy at a reasonable level
and to ensure at the same time that the vulnerable sections of society are fully
protected. Excluding the expenditure on interest, the provision for other non-plan
expenditure in 1993-94 is about Rs.3,180 crore lower than the Revised Estimates
for the current year. As in previous years, no separate provision is being made for
additional dearness allowance which may become payable next year. The additional
expenditure on this account will have to be absorbed by all Ministries within the
approved budget provision.
 4 9 . Coming to receipts, gross tax revenues at the existing level of taxation are
estimated at Rs. 89,389 crore compared to Rs. 78,782 crore in the current year.
States’ share of taxes next year is estimated at Rs.22,590 crore as against Rs.
20,525 crore in the current year’s Revised Estimates. I am taking a credit of Rs.
3,700 crore for market borrowings as against the current year’s level of Rs. 3,670
crore. External assistance, net of repayments, is estimated at Rs. 6,819 crore as
against Rs.5,374 crore in the current year. Net small savings collections next year
are estimated to reach the current year’s level of Rs. 5,500 crore despite heavy
maturities falling due next year. As in the current year’s Revised Estimates, I am
taking credit of Rs. 3,500 crore for receipts from disinvestment of equity in public
enterprises. Total receipts at the existing levels of taxation are estimated at
Rs.130,990 crore and total expenditure at Rs.131,323 crore leaving a gap of Rs.
333 crore.


