 SPEECH OF SHRI VISHWANATH PRATAP SINGH MINISTER OF
 FINANCE INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1985-86


Sir,
 I deem it a great privilege to present the first Budget of the new Government.
 2. I am conscious of the fact that the tremendous responsibility that has
devolved on us at this critical juncture arises not only from the office that we hold but
more so from the immense trust that the people have reposed in us. We pledge all our
endeavour to justify this trust of the common man.
 3. I am reminded of the words of our beloved departed leader, the late Prime
Minister Smt. Indira Gandhi:
 “No section of our vast and diverse population should feel forgotten. Their
 neglect is our collective loss.”
 We can no longer hear her voice, but her words will live with us. In the task of
nation-building, she spared herself no pain - not even the pain of death. She has left
us a legacy signed in her own blood; a legacy to preserve this country and keep it
moving ahead. To this cause of hers we rededicate ourselves.
 4. The Economic Survey, which has been presented to the House, deals with
economic developments in the current year in detail. I shall, therefore, touch upon
only a few salient features of the current economic situation.
 5. The overall growth in national income in 1984-85 is anticipated to be of
the order of 4 per cent on top of 7.4 per cent recorded in the previous year. Food
production in 1983-84 turned out to be even better than what was anticipated at this
time last year. Output of foodgrains reached 151.5 million tonnes from the level of
about 130 million tones in 1982-83. Agricultural growth in 1983-84 was 13.6 per cent.
In 1984-85, food production is likely to be around the record level achieved in the
previous year. Industrial production also recovered during the year and, according to
present indications, it may show a growth rate of about 7 per cent in 1984-85. For the
Sixth Plan as a whole, however, the growth rate in industry is likely to average about
6 per cent, which is below the Plan target.
 6. The major infrastructure sectors performed reasonably well in 1984-85.
Power generation during the period April-December 1984 was 13.5 per cent higher
than in the same period of the previous year, as compared with an increase of 7.6 per
cent in 1983-84. Coal production increased by 6.9 per cent during April-December
 1

1984 compared with 5.8 per cent in 1983-84. Freight movement by rail, which had
stagnated in 1983-84, picked up in the current year with a modest growth of 3.2 per
cent in the first nine months.
 7. Our balance of payments situation during the year was comfortable with
a net accretion in reserves of about Rs.547 crores upto end - January 1985. Although
a part of the increase in rupee terms is because of the strengthening of the U.S. dollar,
it is heartening that the improvement in the balance of payments situation witnessed
in 1983-84 was sustained during the current year. Trade data, available upto November,
1984, show an increase in exports by 23 per cent and that in imports by 14 per cent
over the corresponding period of the previous year. Trade deficit, on provisional basis,
is estimated at Rs.3016 crores in the current year upto November as compared with
Rs.3080 crores in the previous year. It will be recalled that the Government had
voluntarily terminated the International Monetary Fund arrangement with effect from
1st May, 1984 after drawing only Special Drawing Rights 3.9 billion out of Special
Drawing Rights 5 billion available under the loan arrangement. That we have been
able to do so is a testimony to our sound financial management during a period when
the external environment has been highly unfavourable.
 8. The rate of inflation which was causing concern towards the end of the
last year, could be effectively contained by the implementation of various anti-
inflationary measures, including curbs on expenditure, coupled with an imaginative
supply management and timely imports. We also, of course, had the benefit of two
successive good crops. Thus, the annual rate of inflation in wholesale prices on 23rd
February, 1985 was 5.2 per cent as compared with 10.0 per cent at the same time last
year. The consumer price index has also shown an increase of only 4.4 per cent in
January 1985 over the level 12 months ago as compared with an increase of 13.7 per
cent in the corresponding period of the previous year.
 9. On the whole, therefore, the economy is functioning well. That the country
has been able to make all this progress within a democratic framework is no mean
achievement. In a country where a large proportion of the population is below the
poverty line, to have raised the necessary resources for its development without material
external help and yet preserve the ballot-box is a tribute to the sagacity of the political
leadership of the country.
 10. However, we should not be lulled into a false sense of complacency as the
task ahead is arduous. I would now like to share with the Hon’ble Members my
perception of the challenges that we face and the Government’s response to meeting
them.
 11. As we enter the Seventh Plan, the resource constraint has become acute,
both at the Centre, and the States. The basic problem is that our non-Plan expenditure
has been increasing at a rate substantially faster than the growth of current revenues.
As a result, budgetary resources for the Plan have been severely eroded. Defence,
 2

interest payments, and food and fertiliser subsidies now account for nearly 70 per cent
of the non-Plan revenue expenditure of the Centre. A sizeable part of the remaining 30
per cent of such expenditure is accounted for by essential maintenance, social and
community services, and grants to States. Further, the increase in non-Plan expenditures
of the States has meant larger transfers to States on this account.
 12. In the past few years, we have been able to finance large increases in the
Annual Plan largely through borrowings, both external and internal. However, this
cannot go on indefinitely. The process of pruning budgetary expenditure at the Centre
and at the States, however painful, must begin so that the necessary adjustment can
take place over a period of time.
 13. The public sector is vital for faster industrialisation, balanced regional
development, and prevention of concentration of wealth and economic power. Over
the years, the public sector has grown rapidly, and an important priority now is to
ensure that there is sufficient internal generation of resources for its future growth.
Given our resource constraint, increasing levels of investments in the public sector are
feasible only through better utilisation of existing capacity and higher return on past
investments. The Seventh Plan will give particular attention to this aspect.
 14. The recent improvement in the balance of payments is gratifying. However,
this is an area where there can be no room for complacency. Some of the factors that
have worked in our favour in the Sixth Plan will not operate with the same vigour in
the Seventh Plan. Oil production, which had increased by about 18 million tonnes
during the last five years, may not increase at the same rate in the future. Repayments
of the International Monetary Fund loan and external commercial borrowings would
also increase sharply.
 15. Recent developments in the world economy have dot only reduced the
availability of external resources for development, but have also made their terms
distinctly harder. The alternative source of external commercial borrowing is expensive.
The room for manoeuvre in terms of increasing the surplus on account of invisibles is
also limited. There can be little doubt that if we have to reconcile a manageable
balance of payments situation with a tolerable debt profile, export earnings would
have to finance a larger and larger proportion of our impots so that the deficit in our
balance of payments is reduced. In the context of the need to conserve scarce foreign
exchange, it would be desirable to increase the domestic production of importables
wherever we have under-utilized capacities. It is necessary also to stress efficient
import substitution, in an economic sense rather than the physical sense, so that
considerations relating to cost and efficiency are incorporated in the frame-work of
policies.
 16. Agricultural and rural development is at the centre of our planning. Control
of inflation, reduction in poverty levels, promotion of employment, and improvement
in our balance of payments are goals which are linked with our success in agriculture.
 3

Our past record has been good, which underscores the soundness of our agricultural
strategy involving structural changes in rural economic relations, greater application
of new technology and fertilisers, and increase in the irrigated area. But, much more
remains to be done on each count. We have to tackle the problem of increasing yields
in different regions, particularly in respect of paddy. We also have to pay special
attention to increasing domestic output of oilseeds through more intensive cultivation
of existing varieties and development of new ones. Import of edible oils is a major
drain on our foreign exchange resources, and higher domestic production will benefit
the economy in several ways.
 17. It is the policy of the Government to provide remunerative prices to our
farmers. The price support operations are already functioning well in respect of certain
major agricultural commodities, like wheat and rice. The Government will, over a
period of time, extend effective price support operations to other important crops also,
particularly oilseeds and pulses.
 18. A crop failure, in the event of a drought or flood, can have disastrous
effect on the livelihood of our farmers and their families. The Government has,
therefore, decided to introduce a comprehensive scheme of crop insurance. Hence-
forth, there will be a built-in insurance cover for all crop loans. The insurance cover
will be provided up to 150 per cent of the crop loan. To begin with, the scheme will
be extended to wheat, paddy, oilseeds and pulses. The insurance charges will be low.
The marginal and, small farmers will be subsidised to the extent of two-thirds of the
insurance charges by Central and State Governments on a matching basis. Details of
the scheme, which are being worked out, will be announced separately.
 19. The integrated Rural Development Programme, the National Rural
Employment Programme, the Rural Landless Employment Guarantee Programme, and
the Programme for providing self-employment opportunities to the educated
unemployed, have helped to reduce the incidence of poverty and have contributed to
increasing the employment opportunities. Government is committed to further
strengthen and improve the performance of these special programmes. The generation
of adequate employment opportunities is at the heart of our development efforts.
Measures being taken now to stimulate the economy will have an important beneficial
impact on the employment situation.
 20. Government proposes to introduce a Social Security Scheme to cover the
risk of death by accident in respect of earning members of poor families comprising
landless labourers, small and marginal farmers, traditional craftsmen and others not
covered by any insurance scheme or workmen’s compensation arrangements. Under
this scheme, a sum of Rs.3000/- will be paid to the dependent of the deceased, who
dies as a result of an accident. The scheme will, to begin with, be introduced in 100
districts in the country, selected in consultation with the States. I hope all sections of
the House will welcome this measure which will cover the needs of the poorest families
in their moment of utter deprivation.
 4

 21. I am glad to inform the House that the target of priority sector advances,
including advances for agriculture and small scale industry, which was fixed at 40 per
cent by end of 1984-85, has already been exceeded by public sector banks. This is a
major achievement in view of the fact that advances to priority sectors were less than
15 per cent in 1969, when the banks were nationalised. A problem that we now face
is the slow pace of recovery of past loans. Hon’ble Members will appreciate that it is
not possible for the credit system to fulfil the task assigned to it unless performance
in repayment of past loans improves.
 22. An important task for the future is to accelerate industrial growth. At the
same time, we must ensure that the pattern of industrial growth conforms to our socio-
economic priorities. Our domestic market is large, the structure of industry is already
diversified, and the base of entrepreneurship has grown. These are important strengths.
We must now aim at reducing costs and prices and improve the competitiveness of our
industry. This process calls for structural changes in the economy and will entail some
costs which we should be prepared to pay. Unproductive investments of the past
should not stifle the productive forces of the future. Indian industry must also become
more self-reliant in financing investment. Regulations must facilitate growth and
respond to the changing external and technological environment. In particular, it is
necessary to bring about closer coordination among fiscal, industrial and trade policies.
 23. A multipronged programme of action is necessary to meet the challenges
of the future. As our Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi observed recently, in the
Parliament:
 “The challenges before our country are many. We have to modernise India.
 We have to change the thinking of the people of India to look ahead into
 the future and not to keep on dwelling on the past. We have to make India
 self-reliant in every important sphere. We have to create a dynamic country
 that is equal to any other country in the world.”
 In this task, our greatest asset is the human resource, and crucial to the success
of all our policies is the development of an effective programme for best utilisation of
this resource through renewed emphasis on education, environment, and the application
of science and technology.
 24. I now propose to announce a few decisions which are designed to reduce
regidities and improve the environment for industrial growth. It is proposed to notify
a list of industries for delicensing so that procedural delays are cut to a minimum in
areas where we want additional capacity. In order to reflect the considerable increase
in the cost and the economic size of projects that has taken place since the asset Emit
for MRTP companies was fixed in 1969, this limit is being revised to Rs.100 crores.
The small scale sector has played a vital role in our economy and the Government
proposes to take further steps to promote its growth. The ceiling of investment in plant
and machinery, which was fixed in 1980, is being raised from Rs.20 lakhs to Rs.35
 5

lakhs. The Ceiling in respect of ancillaries is being raised from the present level of
Rs.25 lakhs to Rs.45 lakhs. Later in my speech, I shall be announcing certain fiscal
measures to facilitate development of this sector.
 25. On the financial side, I propose to facilitate the mobilisation of resources
from the market by the corporate sector and to reduce its dependence on public financial
institutions. With a view to improving the marketability of convertible debentures of
non-MRTP and non-FERA companies, the maximum interest payable by them on
such issues is being raised from 13.5 per cent to 15 per cent. The Securities Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1956, is being amended to ensure free transfer of securities of listed
public limited companies. This measure will particularly benefit small investors spread
all over the country. In order to offer wide choice to investors, certain changes are
being made in respect of listing requirements of closely-held companies. Such
companies will be permitted to enlist by offering 40 per cent of their equity capital in
two stages over a period of 3 years and capitalise a larger portion of their free reserves
before going to the public. In order to diversify the market, a new instrument, namely,
Convertible Cumulative Preference Share is being introduced. Several measures to
reduce the prevailing high cost of public issues are being announced separately.
 26. The corporate sector should also be permitted to play a legitimate role
within defined norms in the functioning of our democracy. It is proposed to introduce
the necessary legislation during this session to allow companies to make contribution
to political parties from out of their profits.
 27. The Government proposes to introduce a special legislation for sick units.
It is proposed to set up a Board for Financial and Industrial Reconstruction, which
will provide a speedy mechanism for amalgamation, mergers and devise such other
solutions as may be necessary to deal with the problem of sick units in the large and
medium sector. The onus for reporting sickness will be laid on the management of the
units themselves, who will be required to seek a fresh mandate from their shareholders
after 50 per cent of the net worth of the company has been eroded. When the company
loses its entire net worth, the existing management and the owners will not have any
further role to play in running the affairs of the unit. It is also proposed that those who
are deemed to be responsible for mismanaging the unit will not have access to assistance
from financial institutions even in new ventures. Bad managers, like bad currency,
have to be kept out of circulation.
 28. Workers are the worst victims of Industrial sickness. Under the present
law, however, when companies are wound up, workers’ dues rank low in priority
compared to secured creditors. To my mind, labour is as much a factor of production
as any other and it is unjust that the workers’ dues should have a lower priority. In
order to rectify this situation, we have taken a decision to introduce the necessary
legislation so that legitimate dues of workers rank pari passu with secured creditors
such as banks in the event of closure of the Company. Such dues will rank above even
 6

the dues to Government. The Government is also considering the introduction of a
scheme of stock options to the employees and workers of companies to encourage
their participation in management.
 29. At present, under the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 where the salary or
wage of an employee exceeds Rs.750/- per month, the bonus payable to such employee
is calculated as if his salary or wage was Rs.750/- per month. It is now proposed to
raise this limit to Rs.1,600/- per month. The eligibility criteria would remain the same.
 30. In addition to the changes being made in the overall policy framework,
the Government is also undertaking a review of certain specific industries with a view
to correcting structural imbalances. Textile industry has a vital place in our economy
in terms of its contribution to output, exports and employment. This industry is,
however, passing through a very difficult period and the need for structural change is
pressing. I shall be proposing certain changes in the fiscal structure of cotton textile
industry. The preparation of a new textile policy is well under way.
 31. The electronics industry is truly the industry of our times. In order to
accelerate the growth of this industry, in November, 1984, the Government announced
a new package of measures for computers. Rates of duty on imports of components
and raw materials were reduced drastically and, in order to protect the interests of
end-users, import policy for computers was also liberalised. It has now been decided
to extend this approach to other items of manufacture in electronics. Details of the
new policy will be announced separately by the Department of Electronics.
 32. I shall now turn to the Revised Estimates for 1984-85 and the Budget
Estimates for 1985-86.
Revised Estimates for 1984-85
 33. There were several unanticipated developments on the budgetary front
during the yew. On the Plan side, higher budgetary provisions had to be provided for
the Central and State Plans. On the non-Plan side, there was substantial increase in
expenditure on defence, food and fertiliser subsidies, and payment of dearness allowance
to Government employees. Larger assistance was given to States affected by floods
and cyclones, and medium term loan has been provided to certain States facing acute
financial problems. On the receipts side, there was some increase in tax revenues and
a significant step-up in small savings collections.
 34. The budgetary support for the Central Plan is now estimated to be higher
at Rs.11,751 crores as against the original outlay of Rs.11,420 crores. The revised
Central Plan outlay is estimated to be Rs.17,495 crores as against the Budget Estimate
of Rs.17,351 crores. Within this overall amount, there were certain changes in the
sectoral outlays. The provision for self-employment scheme for educated unemployed
youth was increased by Rs.124 crores and the National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development was provided an additional amount of Rs.152 crores against
 7

disbursements under external aid programmes. Additional provisions were also made
for Visakhapatnam Steel Plant, mines, non-conventional energy sources, atomic energy,
electronics, food storage godowns, and certain other sectors. The Revised Estimates
of the Central Plan outlay in some areas, notably, petroleum, coal, and fertilisers were,
however, lower. The provision made in the Budget for Central assistance for State
Plans has also been stepped up by Rs.153 crores.
 35. On the non-Plan side, during the year, nine instalments of additional
dearness allowance including relief to pensioners, were sanctioned to Central
Government employees. These are estimated to cost about Rs.715 crores in the current
year against the lump sum provision of Rs.300 crores made in the Budget. Ad hoc
bonus sanctioned to Government employees in the current year would cost Rs.61
crores.
 36. Food subsidy in the current year will increase from Rs.850 crores to
Rs.1100 crores. This is mainly due to increase in procurement price of paddy, lower
realisation from sale of wheat and sharp increase in stocks of foodgrains. The subsidy
on domestic fertilisers will go up from Rs.930 crores to Rs.1200 crores. The subsidy
on imported fertilisers will increase from Rs.150 crores to Rs.632 crores owing to
increase in the cost and volume of imports.
 37. Assistance to States affected by floods and cyclones was stepped up by
Rs.130 crores. Consequent on larger small savings collections, the share payable to
States was also increased by Rs.440 crores. The provision for loans to States for
purchase of agricultural inputs was stepped up by Rs.60 crores. In addition, special
medium-term loan of Rs.440 crores has also been provided to States which faced
serious financial difficulties during the year.
 38. Defence expenditure in the current year is estimated at Rs.7175 crores
against the Budget Estimates of Rs.6800 crores. Interest payments are expected to be
Rs.390 crores higher than the original estimate of Rs.5,600 crores.
 39. Certain public sector enterprises have suffered large cash losses and
additional budgetary support had to be provided to them. Taking into account these
and other variations, including notional provisions for conversion of equity in certain
public undertakings into loans, assistance towards their interest dues to Government
and additional subscription to International Monetary Fund, the total non-Plan
expenditure is estimated at Rs.29,740 crores against the Budget Estimates of Rs.26,066
crores.
 40. Under non-tax revenue, the dividend from Railways is likely to be less by
Rs.211 crores. The profit from sale of edible oil will also be less due to high international
prices. Mainly due to additional budgetary support provided to certain public
undertakings and improvements in the finances of some others, interest receipts from
public sector undertakings and others are, however, estimated to be Rs.439 crores
higher than the Budget Estimates.
 8

 41. Under capital receipts, I am glad to report that small savings collections
during the year are now expected to reach Rs.3,300 crores against the Budget Estimate
of Rs.2,400 crores. Receipts from special deposits of non-government provident funds
are estimated to be higher by Rs.75 crores and deposits by public sector undertakings
of their surplus funds by Rs.200 crores. Corresponding to the increase in expenditure,
receipts from special securities to International Monetary Fund will also go up by
Rs.149 crores. Taking into account the additional recoveries from State Governments
and other variations, capital receipts in the current year are estimated at Rs.17,778
crores compared with the Budget Estimate of Rs.16,757 crores.
 42. Total receipts are thus estimated to go up from Rs.40,763 crores to
Rs.42,710 crores. Total expenditure is. estimated to go up from Rs.42,536 crores to
Rs.46,695 crores. This will leave a budgetary deficit of Rs.3,985 crores as compared
with Rs.1,773 crores in the Budget Estimates.
 43. The deficit is higher than what I would have ideally liked. I am glad that
this deficit has been absorbed by the economy without any adverse effects on prices,
thanks to the favourable agricultural situation. Howerver, as a necessary caution, in
the coming year we would need to curtail the size of the deficit, though it has been
said that “anyone who lives within his means suffers from lack of imagination”. Not
that I lack imagination, but I do not propose to run riot.
Budget Estimates for 1985-86
 44. The current year marks the end of the Sixth Plan. It is estimated that
public sector Plan expenditure during the Sixth Plan period will be of the order of
Rs.1,10,000 crores as against the originally envisaged outlay of Rs.97,500 crores. In
view of the price rise during the period, outlays in real terms will, however, be lower
than in the original Plan. Nevertheless, it is gratifying that the target of 5.2 per cent for
the annual growth rate of the economy would have been met. Foodgrains output will
be close to the Plan target, and crude oil production will significantly exceed it. In
power, additional installed capacity has been below Plan target; nevertheless, we would
have added nearly 50 per cent to the existing installed capacity at the beginning of the
Plan. In irrigation, additions to potential would be around 11.5 million hectares as
against the Plan target of 13.7 million hectares.
 45. As we enter the Seventh Plan, the main task is to consolidate the gains of
the past and give a new thrust to the movement for increasing productivity, while at
the same time ensuring financial and monetary stability. After taking into account
higher devolution and grants to States arising out of the implementation of the
recommendations of the Finance Commission, and essential non-Plan expenditure on
account of defence and subsidies, the budgetary resources available for the Plan in
1985-86 are far short of our overall requirements.
 46. In allocating these resources. I was particularly guided by the need to
provide greater Central assistance for State Plans as otherwise many States would not
 9

be in a position even to protect their on-going projects in crucial sectors. When the
States’ Plans for 1984-85 were approved, it was expected that the States’ own budgetary
resources as also contributions from their public sector undertakings would be Rs.5,740
crores. The latest assessment indicates deterioration of the order of Rs.2,300 crores in
the transactions of the current year.
 47. Central assistance to State Plans in 1985-86 is being increased to about
Rs.6,000 crores as comapred with Rs.4,313 crores in 1984-85, which is an increase of
39 per cent as compared with an increase of 13 per cent provided last year. The States
have also been authorised to go in for higher market borrowings to the tune of Rs.1,600
crores, which is an increase of 20 per cent over 1984-85. This order of increase in
Central assistance and market borrowings, on top of other transfers, has made a heavy
draft on Centre’s own resources for the Plan.
 48. In view of the elections in several States, the annual Plans of the States
have not yet been finalised. It is expected that the process of finalising the State Plans
will be completed in the next few weeks. In view of the sharp increase in central
transfers on account of Plan as well as Finance Commission’s recommendations,
Centre’s resources are already over-stretched, and it will not be possible for the Centre
to bear the additional burden of overdrafts by the States. For, ultimately, it is the
common man who pays. Despite a large step-up in Central assistance, market
borrowings and negotiated loans, a reasonable Plan outlay for the States would be
possible only if they make an earnest effort at mobilising a higher level of resources
and improving the working of States enterprises.
 49. Plan outlays of Union territories have been fixed at Rs.640 crores as against
Rs.558 crores in 1984-85. Central Budget provides Rs.578 crores and the balance of
Rs.62 crores will be met through additional resource mobilisation measures of the
Union territories during the course of the year.
 50. The Central Plan for 1985-86 has been fixed at Rs.18,500 crores as
compared with Rs.17,351 crores in 198485. In view of the resource constraint, while
determining sectoral priorities, I have considered it prudent to complete projects already
under implementation rather than taking on new starts. It is also my endeavour to
provide more for projects which are in an advanced stage of execution and which can
be commissioned more speedily so that the benefits can start flowing to the economy
as early as possible. Earlier in my speech, I referred to the excellent performance of
the agricultural sector. In order to augment the efforts of State Governments in
accelerating investment in agriculture, in the Central Plan an outlay of Rs.790 crores
has been provided for the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation and Department
of Agricultural Research and Education. A provision of Rs. 165 crores has been made
for the new fertiliser factories at Guna and Aonla which are to be set up based on
Bombay Righ gas to be transported through the Hazira-Bijaipur-Jagdishpur pipeline.
 10

 51. A total provision of Rs.932 crores has been made for Rural Development
in the Central Plan. Pending finalisation of the State Plans, the provisions for Integrated
Rural Development Programme and National Rural Employment Programme have
been kept at more or less the same level as in the current year and will be enhanced
later, if required. Honourable members should be glad to know that projects worth
more than Rs.800 crores have been sanctioned for implementation under the Rural
Landless Employment Guarantee Programme. This programme will have an outlay of
Rs.400 crores in 1985-86.
 52. Honourable Members are well aware of the Government’s emphasis on
the restructuring of the educational system. We are in the process of evolving a new
National Policy on Education. The Government is committed to making the education
of girls free all over the country upto the Higher Secondary level. A total provision of
Rs.221 crores has been made for Education in the Central Sector including provisions
for these new initiatives.
 53. Consistent with our goal to achieve a net reproduction rate of unity by the
year 2000 A.D., the Government would go in for an imaginative family planning
programme on voluntary basis. Combined with effective immunization programme to
reduce the mortality and morbidity rate among children, Family Welfare programmes
are of great significance in the context of overall development. An outlay of Rs.500
crores has been provided for Family Welfare programmes. In order to effectively use
the results of medical research, outlay for Indian Council of Medical Research has
been increased to Rs.30 crores.
 54. During the Sixth Plan, the Government launched the Accelerated Rural
Water Supply Programme to assist the States and Union territories in providing drinking
water supply to villages. Members would be happy to know that the allocation during
the Sixth Plan period on this programme would exceed Rs.925 crores against the
original outlay of Rs.600 crores and that this has enabled the States to cover about two
lakh problem villages during the Plan period.
 55. The potential of Indian Science and Technology for contributing to
modernisation and development is immense. An outlay of Rs.1068 crores is being
provided for Ministries of Science and Technology and Environment and Departments
like Atomic Energy, Space, Ocean Development and Electronics.
 56. On the energy front, the Government attaches great importance to the
need for a gradual transition from the present dependence on oil to coal and electricity
in the medium term. Honourable Members would be happy to note that additional
power generating capacity to the extent of 14000 M.W. would have been added by the
end of the Sixth Plan period. Ibis would mean a near 50 per cent increase over the
capacity of 28,448 M.W. at the commencement of the Plan. In the Central Sector
alone, additional capacity to the extent of 3,350 M.W. has been added during the Sixth
 11

Plan. For 1985-86, the Department of Power has been provided an outlay of Rs.2090
crores against Rs.1446 crores during 1984-85.
 57. Coal production of 147.5 million tonnes is expected to be achieved in
1984-85. This is to be stepped up to 158.50 million tonnes in 1985-86. For the
Department of Coal, an outlay of Rs.1102 crores has been provided.
 58. Honourable Members are well aware of the quantum jump in the field of
crude production, which would be 29.4 million tonnes by the end of this year compared
to 11.4 million tonnes at the beginning of the Sixth Plan. This has become possible
due to the Accelerated Production Programme initiated in 1982-83, which has raised
the annual production from Bombay High to 20.3 million tonnes from a level of 4.2
million tonnes in 1979-80. For the Department of Petroleum, an outlay of Rs.3261
crores is being provided. A provision of Rs.100 crores has been made for the Gas
Authority of India, a newly created organisation for the construction of gas pipe-lines.
 59. The Government’s concern for preservation of our forests is reflected in
the creation of a separate department of Forest and Wild Life. This Department will
have an outlay of around Rs.54 crores, including Rs.26 crores for social forestry and
creation of rural fuel wood plantation.
 60. The outlay for the Department of Environment is about Rs.36 crores,
which includes Rs.10 crores for initiating action on the project of Prevention of Pollution
of the Ganga. The other major environmental programmes aim at conserving biological
diversity, pollution monitoring, eco-development in critically degraded or fragile areas
and research and development, besides creation of advanced centres for priority
environmental studies.
 61. Though a substantial portion has been transferred to the States as committed
non-Plan liability, the Central Plan provides for Rs.207 crores for the various
programmes benefiting the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Centre’s
contribution to the Special Component Plan for Scheduled Castes has been stepped up
to Rs.165 crores. In order to rehabilitate the refugees from Sri Lanka, a provision of
about Rs.9 crores is being made.
 62. The Government approved a scheme for expansion of TV network in the
country in July, 1983. This plan envisaged setting up of large number of High Power
and Low Power transmitters in the country so as to make the TV programmes available
to 70 per cent of the country’s population. The number of transmitters would go up to
180 by 31st March, 1985. Outlay for 1985-86 has been fixed at Rs.110 crores for
information and broadcasting.
 63. The priorities outlined in Annual Plan for 1985-86 will further accelerate
the implementation of the 20 point programme. The total amount allocated to the
programme in the Central Plan is Rs.4900 crores for the next year as against Rs.4,141
crores provided for in the current year, representing an increase of 18.3 per cent.
 12

 64. I must, however, emphasise that proper implementation of the Plan requires
not only financial allocations but also better project formulation and efficient
management. It is proposed to make certain changes in the administrative procedures
to facilitate quicker plan implementation. Before an investment decision is taken,
administrative Ministries will be required to ensure that projects have been fully worked
out and the executive authorities have taken the necessary preparatory action for
implementation. It has, therefore, been decided to provide sufficient funding for
preparation of detailed feasibility reports before budgetary allocations are made for
projects. Steps are also being considered to advance the finalisation of the annual Plan
and Vote on Account to facilitate communication of funds well before the
commencement of the new financial year. These measures would result in even
implementation of projects throughout the year and avoid the rush of expenditure
towards the close of the year.
 65. Non-Plan expenditure has been kept to the minimum. Next year’s Budget
provides larger transfers to States in terms of the recommendations of the Eighth
Finance Commission. Grants to States covered by the Finance Commission’s
recommendations will go up from Rs.518 crores in the Budget Estimates for 1984-85
to Rs.1,215 crores in the Budget Estimates for the next year.
 66. Defence expenditure next year is placed at Rs.7686 crores (excluding
defence pensions). Interest payments are estimated at Rs.7075 crores taking into account
the increase in the volume of borrowings and the cost of borrowing. A provision of
Rs. 1100 crores has been made for food subsidy, Rs.1200 crores for subsidy on domestic
fertilisers and Rs.601 crores for subsidy on imported fertilisers. Export promotion and
market development has been allocated Rs.530 crores. Consequent on the separation
of Postal services from the Telecommunications services, the deficit of Postal services
estimated at Rs.187 crores will be borne by the Civil estimates in the Budget of next
year. Following larger small savings collections, loans to States against these collections
are placed at Rs.2375 crores.
 67. A lump sum of Rs.300 corres has been provided in 1985-86 for payment
of additional instalments of dearness allowance, pensionary relief, etc., to Central
Government employees. Provision has also been made for committed expenditure on
Plan schemes completed in Sixth Plan period. Including these and other provisions,
total non-Plan expenditure in 1985-86 is estimated at Rs.32,786 crores against Rs.29,740
crores in Revised Estimates for the current year.
 68. At this point, I would like to refer to a matter concerning the Central
Government employees. In the Budget for 1983-84, my distinguished predecessor had
announced the appointment of the Fourth Central Pay Commission. The Commission
which was appointed in July 1983 is still at work. Meanwhile, a very large number of
Government employees have been retiring without the benefit of a higher pension
which was anticipated as a result of the recommendations of the Commission. At
 13

present, pension is calculated on the pay and a part of dearness allowance sanctioned
upto the average Consumer Price Index level of 320. The last instalment of dearness
allowance has been sanctioned with reference to the average Consumer Price Index
level of 568. I now propose, as a measure of relief to the Central Government employees
retiring on or after 31st March, 1985, to treat the entire dearness allowance sanctioned
upto the average Consumer Price Index level of 568 as pay for the purpose of retirement
benefit. Simultaneously, I also propose to remove the present ceiling of Rs.1,500/- per
month on pension and increase the ceiling of Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity from
Rs.36,000/- to Rs.50,000/, The House will agree with me that those who have devoted
the best years of their lives to the service of the country are deserving of what-ever
support we can give them.
 69. Coming to receipts, the gross tax revenue at existing levels of taxation is
estimated at Rs.25,514 crores compared with Rs.23,702 crores in the current year. The
States’ share of taxes is estimated at Rs.6592 crores against Rs.5777 crores in the
current year. Out of this increase, Rs.487 crores are due to stepping up of States’ share
of basic excise duties from 40 per cent to 45 per cent from next year as recommended
by the Eighth Finance Commission. The dividend from Railways will be Rs.303 crores
higher than in the current year.
 70. Receipts from market loans are placed at Rs.5100 crores against Rs.4100
crores in the current year. Small savings collections are estimated at Rs.3900 crores
against Rs.3300 crores in the current year. External assistance net of repayments is
estimated at Rs.2510 crores compared with Rs.2146 crores in the current year. Taking
into account these and other variations in the receipts, the total receipts in 1985-86 are
estimated at Rs.47,635 crores. These receipts take into account the effect of revision
of Railway fares and freights. Total expenditure is placed at Rs.51,295 crores. The
overall budgetary gap at existing rates of taxation will thus be Rs.3,660 crores.


