SPEECH OF SHRI MORARJI R.DESAI, DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND
MINISTER OF FINANCE INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR
 1968-69
 Sir,
 I rise to present the Budget for the year 1968-69. The Indian economy is emerging
now from one of the most difficult periods since independence. Successive droughts,
shortage of food and raw materials, rising prices, subdued industrial demand, inadequacy
of exports and savings and sluggishness in the capital market had combined to create
a feeling of despondency which has afflicted us in the recent past. Honourable Members,
I am sure, would agree that we can now look back on the past two years with a sense
of relief. With the help of our friends abroad and the efforts of our own people, we
have been able to avoid a major disaster and to impart at the same time a new sense
of dynamism to our programmes of agricultural development.
 2. I look upon the coming financial year with a certain degree of optimism
and with the expectation that given the right policies, it can become a year of revival.
With the sharp increase in agricultural production and rising incomes, there would
undoubtedly be some increase in the demand for industrial products. Recent trends in
exports have been encouraging. The price level is registering a decline. The objective
of policy in the coming year must be to consolidate the gains: so that a major
developmental programme can be undertaken in our Fourth Five-Year Plan which will
be launched in the following year.
 3. Honourable Members are already familiar with the various aspects of the
new agricultural strategy. The availability of nitrogenous fertiliser has been more than
twice as high this year as in 1965-66. Arrangements are in hand to maintain supplies
at a high level in the coming year. The area under high yielding varieties of seeds is
expected to increase from 15 million acres this year to 21 million acres next year. In
recent years we have concentrated on minor irrigation works in order to get quick
results from investments. In the current year, 3 to 31/2 million acres were covered by
new minor irrigation facilities and the target for the coming year is another 31 million
acres. Major irrigation schemes on which substantial progress has been made also
deserve our prior attention.
 4. We have to make earnest efforts to ensure that we introduce the same kind
of technological advance in commercial crops as we have achieved in respect of
foodgrains. Increased productivity per acre is essential if adequate returns to the farmer
are to be reconciled with reasonable prices to the domestic consumer and
competitiveness in export markets. The processing industries can make a valuable
contribution in this regard; and I shall have occasion later to refer to a measure I
propose to introduce to encourage these efforts.
 1

 5. Assurance of remunerative prices to the farmer for his products is an
integral part of the new agricultural strategy. I should like to assure the House that
inadequacy of finance will not be allowed to stand in the way of purchase by
Government and the Food Corporation of such supplies as may be forthcoming at the
procurement prices. The target of procurement is 7 million tonnes; and well-planned
procurement measures by all concerned will have to be undertaken to reach this target.
Even with this target, import of substantial amount of foodgrains appears to be necessary
in order that the long unfulfilled programme of building up a sizeable buffer stock can
be achieved after making allowance for replenishment of private inventories and some
increase in consumption. An agreement has already been signed to import 3.5 million
tonnes of foodgrains from the U. S. A. under PL 480.
 6. The steady rise in prices over the last few years has been a matter of
all-round concern. Over the four years ending March 1967 prices had risen by 60 per
cent and there was a further rise during the earlier part of the current financial year. In
recent months there has been a downward trend. A part of the recent decline is no
doubt seasonal; bit it is reasonable to hope that the increasing flow of foodgrains and
consumer articles will help in the stabilisation of prices at reasonable levels.
 7. Sir, I am happy to say that Government was able to get agreement this
year that a part of the increase in dearness allowance which was due to Government
employees be credited to their provident funds instead of being paid in cash. These
special contributions can be withdrawn in the coming year. But may I request my
Honourable friends to join me in an earnest appeal to Government employees not to
withdraw these contributions as that will help in maintaining a climate of price stability.
Economics, they say, is a dismal science; and I see no escape from saving more in
order to preserve the value of the savings.
 8. A substantial part of increase in incomes would need to be ploughed back
into further investment, if an adequate tempo of development is to be achieved and
maintained. In part, investments will be undertaken directly by those who save out of
larger incomes. Farmers will wish to purchase pumps, tractors and other equipment.
In part, however, savings of all classes have to be mobilised for outside investment,
public or private.
 9. The small savings movement has a vital role to play in securing this
objective. Net small savings have been relatively low in the recent past, in consequence
of the droughts. I am making a number of modifications in the small savings schemes
and necessary notifications are being issued in this regard. Briefly, we are introducing
a new five-year deposit scheme with a tax-free return of about 4.5 per cent and are
accordingly revising the return on the existing five-year cumulative time deposit scheme,
and the 12-year and 10-year tax-free savings certificates. With a renewed drive for
collection, particularly, in the rural areas, these measures should help in greater
mobilisation of resources.

 2

 10. The return on provident fund accumulations of Government employees is
also being raised; I propose to do so, however, on the first Rs.10,000 of accumulations
only. Those who are self-employed do not have the facility of saving through provident
funds. I propose, therefore, to introduce a public provident fund scheme under which
all sections of the community will have the opportunity of contributing to a provident
fund, and to avail of the income-tax benefits provided for under the law in respect of
contributions to such funds. It is my hope that in time, this provident fund scheme will
secure substantial resources for the exchequer. Self-employed persons such as doctors,
lawyers, artists, actors and actresses, like old soldiers, are never known to retire. But
they too reach their prime some day. Something laid by-legitimately, and with
considerable saving in tax liability-should prove valuable even to those who have a
greater claim to immortality than most of us.
 11. A moderate increase in exports has occurred during the current year; and
the increase in imports has been less than that in exports. Nevertheless, our foreign
exchange reserves declined by $ 60 million between April and mid-November, 1967;
and it became necessary to draw $ 90 million from the International Monetary Fund.
In recent weeks, there has been a welcome increase in reserves. In response to better
export performance, which may be expected to continue. The fact that we have been
able to get some debt relief this year has also helped in managing the over-all foreign
exchange position. With the revival of industrial activity, import demand will be strong
once again; and this underscores the fact that we cannot restore viability to our balance
of payments without a sustained increase in export earnings . Basically, this is a
question of increasing the production of exportable goods and increasing efficiency
and savings all round. Export policies have also to be geared promptly to changing
circumstances.
 12. That is why we announced a number of changes in export duties on the
7th of February without waiting for the presentation of the Budget when every Finance
Minister likes to mix the bitter with the sweet. The urgency of the situation was such
that 1 had to forego the certainty of receiving at least one bouquet in the midst of
whatever brickbats that may be in store. We have been giving cash assistance to some
of our exports, particularly the newer manufactures. Certain adjustments in these rates
of assistance have already been made. Government propose to maintain the new
structure of assistance intact-encouraging neither uncertainty nor perpetual expectations
of further assistance. We have also recently streamlined and simplified the procedures
for release of foreign exchange for the purpose of export promotion.
 13. One of the important needs of the export sector has been the provision of
adequate and cheap credit. During the year, the industrial Development Bank enlarged
the facilities for medium-term export credit; and the Reserve Bank also took measures
to ensure that credit for exports of newer manufactures was available at particularly
concessional rates. It is desirable that credit should be available for exports generally
at a relatively low rate of, interest. I am, therefore, making provision in the Budget for
 3

the coming year for grant of a subsidy towards interest charges on export finance
provided by the banks. The Reserve Bank will announce the details of the scheme
which will include the prescription of a ceiling on interest charges qualifying under
the scheme.
 14. An adequate expansion of India’s export earnings is only possible within
an appropriate international framework. It is a matter of gratification for us that the
second session of UNCTAD is being held in New Delhi. It is our earnest hope that the
deliberations of the Conference will help in promoting co-operation in trade and aid
between the developed and the developing countries and among the developing
countries themselves.
 15. As the Honourable Members are aware, we took a series of steps during
the year to stimulate industrial output. With the revival of agricultural production and
the consequent rise in incomes, a number of consumer goods items such as cotton
yarn and vanaspati are showing an increase in production. There are also signs of a
revival in the production of commercial vehicles. Industries supplying the needs of
agriculture have done well even in the recent past and continue to do so. The level of
private investment should pick up in response to the generally better economic outlook.
Continued increase, in exports and progress towards reducing the dependence on
imports will also be necessary to create and sustain a climate of industrial revival. In
this connection, it is a matter of satisfaction that our capital goods industries have won
valuable export orders in the recent past and that we hope, to get sizeable orders for
wagons, rails and other steel products from the Soviet Union. I expect an increase in
the industrial production of the order of at least 5 to 6 per cent in the coming year.
This increase, though moderate as compared to our past performance, would represent
a significant advance over the rate of growth in the last two years.
 16. The working of public Sector undertakings has been engaging our earnest
attention. The public sector has been particularly hit by recession because it is mostly
engaged in the production of capital goods or producer goods. The general recovery in
the economy will undoubtedly help, but the basic problem of achieving a long-term
improvement in efficiency and yields will have to be tackled urgently. The
recommendations made by the Administrative Reforms Commission are being actively
studied and 1 trust before long certain concrete steps will be taken to effect a lasting
improvement.
 17. Now that I have taken you through a survey of savings and exports, of
prices and production, I could perhaps turn safely to some inconvenient facts of life.
In my Budget Speech last year, I had referred to the need to avoid deficit financing in
the circumstances then prevailing in the country. These circumstances have changed
for the better; but unfortunately, not my budgetary fortunes so far. In actual practice,
the current year is expected to end with a large deficit of Rs.300 crores at the Centre.
Honourable Members would appreciate that it is neither an easy nor a pleasant matter

 4

for me to come to this House with this particular piece of information. It is some
solace that the worsening in the budgetary position has little to do with unexpected
increase in expenditure. The deterioration has come about on account of shortfalls in
revenues and foreign aid utilisation which in turn have been due to the low level of
economic activity and also, because of a decline in the resources of the States and
public sector enterprises. To some extent perhaps, we were also misled into undue
optimism by the oft repeated charge of underestimation of resources. As soon as the
picture regarding shortfall in resources started emerging, I tried to make judicious
readjustment of outlays. The manoeuvrability for such an exercise in the midst of the
year is extremely limited, particularly if this is super-imposed on a tight budget. There
was also the consideration of the effect which any drastic cut in public spending
would have had on the recessionary situation. In fact there were suggestions from
most quarters to step up expenditure in one way or the other. Some steps were also
taken in this direction. However, the expenditure estimates in totality have been
contained; and on this count at least I can claim Some credit for having taken to heart
the admonitions of the Honourable Members.
 18. The Budget which 1 presented in May last had assumed the utilisation of
external assistance, other than PL 480, of Rs.865 crores. Actual aid utilisation is not
expected to amount to more than Rs.756 crores, thus showing a shortfall of as much
as Rs..109 crores. The receipts from import duties will be about Rs.125 crores less
than assumed in the original Budget. Further, the Railway revenue shows a shortfall
of Rs.17 crores, their ordinary working expenses being at the same time, Rs.23 crores
higher-in all, a deterioration of Rs.40 crores. On the Posts & Telegraphs side also,
there is a similar deterioration of Rs.22 crores. I The internal resources of public
sector undertakings have gone down by Rs.41 crores, the bulk of which is in respect
of Hindustan Steel.
 19. There is one other factor which has also contributed to the large deficit
this year-I am referring to the overdrafts of States. Last March we had provided Rs.55
crores’ to some States in order to enable them to clear their overdrafts with the Reserve
Bank which were likely to be outstanding at the end of 1966-67. In the Budget that I
presented last May, I had also made a provision of Rs.50 crores for the same purpose.
In the event, a total of Rs.113 crores was given to the States in respect of their overdrafts
at the end of the last fiscal year; it was hoped that with the burden of past overdrafts
taken care Of, the States would be able to avoid similar overdrafts in the current fiscal
year. Unfortunately, some of the States are still running overdrafts and 1 have decided
to provide Rs.50 crores more in the current year’s Revised Estimates to clear the
overdrafts once again at the end of the current year. While we have thus decided to
safeguard the Plans of the States next year, Honourable Members would appreciate
that we cannot allow a similar situation to develop next year also. I trust that the State
Governments will not precipitate a situation in which we will be obliged to reconsider
the existing banking facilities enjoyed by the States with the. Reserve Bank.

 5

 20. Next year’s revenue receipts at existing levels of taxation are estimated at
Rs.3132 crores, being Rs.1 38 crores more, than the current year’s Revised Estimates.
The major increase of Rs.86 crores occurs under excise duties. Income tax is likely to
show an improvement of about Rs.10 crores only as the profitability in the corporate
sector this year will be reflected in the assessment next year. Customs revenue is
expected to show a slight fall of Rs.3 crores, the anticipated improvement, under
import duties being more than offset by reduction under export duties. The rest of the
increase in revenue next year occurs mainly under interest receipts. Of the total revenue
receipts, Rs.423 crores will be transferred to the States as their share of Central taxes
and duties.
 21. External aid, other than PL 480, is placed at Rs.775 crores. Next year’s
repayment liabilities are Rs.193 crores, thus giving a net figure of Rs.582 crores. The
rupee accruals in respect of PL 480 imports as also the dollar credit under the new
agreements are placed at Rs.274 crores as against Rs.366 crores this year.
 22. Next year’s expenditure estimates include Rs.1015 crores for Defence as
against Rs.970 crores in the Revised Estimates, thus showing a rise 6f Rs.45 crores
which is mostly accounted for by dearness allowance increases and somewhat larger
provision for replacement stores. Included in these estimates is also an increase of
Rs.2 crores for pension charges and Rs.7 crores under Capital. Border roads account
for a provision of Rs.48 crores which is Rs.5 crores higher than in the Revised Estimates.
 23. Sir, I am well aware that our defence expenditure should receive the utmost
scrutiny so that the resources available for development are not unduly eroded. The
question of reducing the magnitude of defence expenditure without detriment to national
security has been continually receiving our earnest attention. Significant progress has
already been achieved towards improving the teeth-to-tall ratio and further measures
to Improve this are in hand; likewise, other measures for improving the
cost-effectiveness of our defence outlays are also under consideration. It is obvious
that with the substantial increase in the price-level that has taken place over the recent
past, some increase in defence expenditure would become unavoidable. Honourable
Members would, however, be interested to note that as a percentage of gross national
product, defence expenditures have already come down from 4.4 per cent in 1963-64
to an estimated 3.2 per cent in 1967-68.
 24. The Budget estimates for 1968-69 include Rs.243 crores on account of
non-Plan grants to States and Union Territories. A provision of Rs.223 crores has also
been made for giving non-Plan loans to States and Union Territories of which Rs.105
crores is for purchase and distribution of fertilisers, seeds and pesticides, and Rs.20
crores for scarcity relief. The provision for non-Plan expenditure under the
developmental heads is estimated at Rs.237 crores as against Rs.214 crores this year
in part as a result of increased provision for export promotion. Rs.186 crores are
provided under heads relating to Administration as against Rs.177 crores this year, the
 6

bulk of the increase being on account of higher dearness allowance. The total interest
charges are estimated at Rs.550 crores as against Rs.50 8 crores this year.
 25. The resources for the Plan next year on the basis of the estimates just
mentioned and a number of miscellaneous items not mentioned here, are placed at
Rs.1544 crores of which Rs.170 crores are to be contributed by public sector
undertakings including the Railways and the Posts and Telegraphs.
 26. The requirements for meeting the Plan outlays of the Centre and those of
the Union Territories as well as for providing Plan assistance to States are, however,
much larger. In making provision for the Plan at the Centre, a balance has to be struck
between the constraint of resources and the need to maintain the progress in respect of
continuing schemes and the initiation of new schemes in sectors of high priority. On
this basis, a sum of Rs.615 crores has been allocated for providing assistance to the
States as against Rs.595 crores this year. Rs.65 crores have been provided for Union
Territories-one crore more than this year. The provision of Rs.1179 crores for the
Centre’s own Plan will only be marginally higher than the current year’s budgeted
outlay of Rs.1172 crores and the expected outlay of about Rs.1150 crores. In the
aggregate, the provision for the Plan in the Centre’s Budget for the coming year
amounts to Rs.1859 crores as against the expected outlay of about Rs.1809 crores in
the current year. This would, of course, be augmented by the resources that the States
themselves are able to raise for their Plans. Honourable Members may like to note that
a provision of Rs.140 crores is being made for building up a buffer stock of foodgrains
which has a valuable part to play in underpinning our plans for development. If account
is taken of this, what may be broadly caned “planned outlays for development” would
show a significant increase over the current year.
 27. I would also like to point out that of the Plan assistance of Rs.615 crores
to the States, Rs.590 crores has been already allocated among the different States by
the Planning Commission and the remaining Rs.25 crores is being specifically
earmarked for a speedy completion of selected major irrigation projects. It is my
earnest hope that the State Governments will provide adequate resources for the urgent
requirements of minor irrigation and rural electrification. Over the year, depending
on the economic situation, I will do my best to supplement the efforts of the States
in these two priority areas.
 28. The main items forming part of the Centre’s outlay of Rs.117 9 crores are:
Rs.172 crores for the Railways, Rs.153 crores for iron and steel, of which Rs.110
crores are for Bokaro, Rs.82 crores for petroleum and Rs.70 crores for chemicals
including fertilisers. The provision for agriculture is Rs.53 crores, that for Posts and
Telegraphs Rs.48 crores and for financial institutions Rs.35 crores. I quite realise that
these provisions do not meet the requirements of all the Ministries; but the constraint
of resources has left me with no choice.

 7

 29. Honourable Members would note that we have decided to appoint a Finance
Commission in advance of the due date so that its findings are available for the
formulation of the Fourth Plan. A copy of the Notification constituting the Commission
and incorporating its terms of reference is being laid on the Table of the House today.
I have been particularly keen for sometime that the various financial problems between
the Centre and the States, and among the States themselves, should be objectively
reviewed so that solutions are found which are not only just but accepted as such by
all concerned. The recommendations of the Commission, I am sure, will serve this
purpose and contribute towards national integrity and harmony.




