 1




 Budget 1999-2000

 Speech of

 Shri Yashwant Sinha
 Minister of Finance

 27th February, 1999

 PART A


Sir,
 I rise to present the budget for the year 1999-2000.
I n t ro d u c t i o n
 2. For the first time after Independence with the enthusiastic support of all
political parties in Parliament, it has been possible for me to discard the long standing
tradition of British Raj of presenting the budget at 5 PM. A new beginning is being
made today as I present the last Budget of 1900’s. I assure you this is not the only
new feature. There are many more in this budget.
The Economic Context
 3. The decade of the nineties has witnessed extraordinary changes. It began
with the collapse of the centrally planned economies; it is ending with market
economies facing a serious crisis.
 4. The year 1998 particularly has been a year of unprecedented global turmoil.
The East Asian financial crisis took a heavy toll of important economies in the region
and spread to other countries. Japan continued in recession and in August 1998
severe crisis afflicted Russia. By January 1999, the contagion had spread to Brazil
triggering massive capital flight and a steep depreciation of the currency. World
output growth dropped below 2%, the growth of world trade decelerated sharply,
commodity prices fell steeply, currencies were savaged and capital flows to developing
countries declined sharply.
 5. In India, we had to contend with the additional challenge of economic
sanctions imposed on us after the Pokhran nuclear tests. While we have not remained
unaffected by these developments, we have reasons to be satisfied at the way we
have withstood the impact of these challenges. Despite the hostile economic

 1

 2
environment, our GDP growth in 1998-99 has accelerated to 5.8% compared to 5%
last year. Our farmers have led the way with 5.3% growth in agriculture and allied
sectors. Since the beginning of 1998-99, we have added $2 billion to our foreign
currency reserves as of February 23, 1999 and we have successfully curbed undue
volatility in the forex market. The current account deficit in the balance of payments
is estimated at a modest 1.4% of GDP compared to 1.6% in 1997-98. Although
inflation had risen sharply during the year, we have succeeded in bringing it down to
below 5% now. All this is described in detail in the Economic Survey presented to
Parliament a few days ago.
 6. However, there is no room for complacency. The challenges before us, both
international and domestic, remain grave. The fiscal and revenue deficits of both
Centre and States are still too high and are undermining our ability to bring down
interest rates, stimulate investment and growth, curb inflationary potential, generate
resources for priority, non-interest expenditure needs and raise exports.
 7. Above all, despite our continuing concern year after year, we have made
only a limited impact on the problems of poverty and unemployment. The various
schemes of the Government in this area lack focus and convergence. The delivery
systems need to be cost effective and community based. The fruits of economic
development should largely reach the poor and the vulnerable specially the Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes who, in turn, need to be
empowered fully. Without this, I am afraid, our planning will be devoid of any direction.
 8. The broad strategy of this Budget therefore is six-fold:
 * Begin a medium-term process of revenue and fiscal deficit reduction, along
 the lines indicated in the Ninth Plan, which will free more resources for
 productive investment and growth and contain inflation.
 * Undertake a major reform of indirect taxes to promote productivity and
 employment.
 * Deepen and widen economic reforms in all major sectors and accelerate
 internal liberalization to release the productive energies and creativity of
 our farmers, manufacturers, traders and service providers.
 * Safeguard the economy from external shocks, revive exports and stimulate
 the domestic engines for growth revival.
 * Strengthen the knowledge-based industries and thus prepare ourselves
 for the challenges of the new millennium.
 Last but not the least
 * Revitalise and redirect public programmes for human development,
 encompassing food security, health care, education, employment and
 shelter. Their focus should be on empowering the poor and the weaker
 sections, especially those belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
 and Other Backward Classes.
Agriculture and Rural Development
 9. This year ’s growth performance has once again underlined the critical
importance of agriculture in our economy. I propose a multi pronged programme to
further strengthen our rural economy.

 3
 10. On water, which is the lifeblood of agriculture, I propose the following
initiatives:
 * It is important to unify the multiplicity of watershed development
 programmes within the framework of a single national initiative - a National
 Movement of Watershed Development that fosters implementation ability
 at the local level and creates community infrastructure for micro watershed
 projects through active involvement of Gram Panchayats, Local Self Help
 Groups and NGOs. For this, a Watershed Development Fund will be
 established with NABARD to cover 100 priority districts within 3 years.
 The Central Government will provide necessary matching assistance to
 NABARD. This will create income generating opportunities for the landless
 and the poor; especially those belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
 Tribes and Other Backward Classes.
 * The Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme aims to expedite the
 completion of ongoing irrigation projects by providing matching assistance
 to States. However, the water rates in most States do not even cover full
 Operations and Maintenance costs. To encourage better management and
 maintenance of costly irrigation assets, the Centre will provide larger
 financial assistance to States that rationalise their water rates to cover at
 least O&M costs.
 * In order to promote farmer participation in water management, the Centre
 will provide a one time management subsidy and recurring assistance over
 an initial period of 3 years to all registered Water Users Associations, linked
 to incremental water rate collection. This will supplement the States’ own
 contribution.
 11. Water and credit must flow together for maximum impact. Last year, I had
announced a number of initiatives for improving the flow of credit from the banking
sector to agriculture. I am happy to report to this House that institutional credit flow
to agriculture has shown a 20% increase in the current year, taking the level to
about Rs.38,000 crore as compared to Rs.31,698 crore in the previous year. I propose
to take the following further measures for improving flow of agricultural and rural
credit:
 * The Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) has emerged as an
 important scheme for financing rural infrastructure projects of the State
 Governments. Last year, I had announced an allocation of Rs.3,000 crore
 from the banking sector under RIDF IV. I propose to continue the scheme.
 The corpus of RIDF V will be raised to Rs.3,500 crore. The repayment period
 is also being extended from five to seven years. The scope of RIDF will also
 be widened to allow lending to Gram Panchayats, Self-Help Groups and
 other eligible organisations for implementing village level infrastructure
 projects.
 * In line with my announcement last year, the Kisan Credit Card Scheme
 has been launched by all public sector banks. These Cards provide timely
 credit to farmers in a flexible and cost effective manner. So far, six lakh
 Kisan Credit Cards have been issued. I am asking public sector banks to

 4
 extend the coverage so that twenty lakh farmers can benefit from this scheme
 in the coming year.
 * The reform measures initiated to strengthen and restructure the Regional
 Rural Banks will continue. A provision of Rs.168 crore is being made for
 recapitalisation of RRBs.
 * Micro enterprises have great potential for generating productive employment,
 especially in rural areas. NABARD and SIDBI have launched schemes for
 promotion of Self Help Groups and NGOs as a channel for flow of funds to
 micro enterprises. Following last budget’s initiative, NABARD is likely to
 cover about 15,000 Self Help Groups in 1998-99, as against the target of
 10,000. I am asking NABARD and SIDBI to redouble their efforts in this
 direction and ensure coverage of at least 50,000 Self Help Groups during
 the course of the next year.
 * To augment the flow of credit for food and agro processing industries, lending
 by banks to this sector will be treated as priority sector lending.
 12. Today, we have a very weak post-harvest storage and marketing
infrastructure. This causes tremendous national loss. To overcome this problem, I
propose to introduce a new credit-linked capital subsidy scheme for construction of
cold storages and godowns. This scheme, which will be implemented by the Ministry
of Agriculture with the help of NABARD, will help create additional cold storage
capacity of 12 lakh tonnes and will rehabilitate and modernise 8 lakh tonnes of
existing units over the next few years. We also propose to create 4.5 lakh tonnes of
onion storage capacity. This House, especially the main opposition party, can readily
appreciate our special concern for onions.
 13. Fragmentation of agricultural land holdings undermines productive use of
land. Some States have lagged behind in attending to this important task of land
reforms. To accelerate reforms in this direction, the Central Government will provide
special financial assistance to States, which undertake this task.
 14. One of the problems with effective distribution and use of fertilizer is the
mismatch between its demand and availability at the on-set of the sowing operations.
In order to tackle this problem, I propose to experiment with an incentive discount
to farmers for lifting fertilizer from the cooperative societies during the lean months
of April and May.
 15. The on-going schemes for the development of degraded and wastelands
will be reoriented to permit local Self Help Groups and the landless poor, specially
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes, to develop and
utilise such lands in each village. The whole programme will be based on participatory
management with the Gram Panchayat having a pivotal role. During 1999-2000, we
will earmark a total amount of Rs.50 crore to take up this scheme on an experimental
basis in those States that are prepared to put in a matching contribution.
National Programme for Rural Industrialisation (NPRI)
 16. Rural Industrialisation is important for creating employment opportunities,
raising rural incomes and strengthening agriculture-industry linkages. Thus far, it
has been pursued by a multiplicity of government agencies. However, the impact of

 5
these programmes at the grass roots level has remained modest. We must integrate
the efforts of the various government agencies and ensure active community
participation. Accordingly, I propose a National Programme for Rural Industrialisation
(NPRI) with the mission to set up 100 rural clusters every year to give a boost to rural
industrialisation. This is being done for the benefit of rural artisans and unemployed
youth. In the long run, it will reduce rural urban disparities. The Small Industry
Development Organisation will coordinate this programme. The Khadi and Village
Industries Commission (KVIC) will play an important role in this. The marketing
infrastructure available with KVIC would be put to optimum use in this effort. It will
go a long way in the marketing of rural industrial products if KVIC could develop its
own brand name for the purpose. The proposed rural clusters will be spread
throughout the country, with a reasonable balance between high potential and
backward rural areas.
National Human Development Initiative (NHDI)
 17. Even a half-century after Independence, the levels of human development
in India lag behind most other countries. The essence of human development should
be to empower vulnerable groups in society to take advantage of the process of
development. Empowerment, in my view, entails access to five basic requirements,
namely, Food, Health Care, Education, Employment and Shelter. It is our resolve to
make them available to the entire population of this country within a decade. With
this initiative for people-centred development, we will be implementing the Prime
Minister’s mandate for ‘reforming the reforms’.
 Food: The Targeted Public Distribution System has been designed to provide food
security, especially to those below the poverty line, on the basis of susbidised foodgrain
prices. With greater involvement of Gram Panchayats in its supervision and
implementation, the Targeted Public Distribution System will be suitably strengthened
to ensure its proper coverage and make it efficient.
 The Targeted Public Distribution System does not however adequately cover the
indigent senior citizens who have no income of their own and none to take care of
them in the village. I propose to launch a new scheme, “Annapurna” in 1999-2000,
to provide food security to such persons. “Annapurna” will provide 10 kg. of foodgrains
per month free of cost to all indigent senior citizens who are eligible for old age
pension but are presently not receiving it and whose children are not residing in the
same village. The number of persons benefitting from the scheme will not for the
present exceed 20% of the old age pensioners within that State. The Gram Panchayat
will be required to identify, prepare and display a list of such persons after giving
wide publicity.
 Health Care: The expansion and improvement of health infrastructure and services
are key goals set out in the Special Action Plan announced by the Prime Minister.
While an extensive network for primary health care has been created in most rural
areas, inadequate community participation and supervision has constrained use of
these facilities to much below their capacity. Our goal is to integrate and synergise
the existing programmes for health care, family welfare, rural development and related
areas in different Central Ministries and to deploy the available resources so that
every household secures ready access to both primary health care and family welfare

 6
services. The Central Government will provide funds to such Gram Panchayats that
come forward with their own contribution to set up primary health care facilities in
their respective areas. This will match similar assistance from the concerned State
Government.
 Education: Access to primary education is critical for empowering people. Several
States have recorded considerable success with their respective models of education
guarantee schemes. I propose to implement an Education Guarantee Scheme at the
national level. The aim will be to provide an elementary school in every habitation,
which does not have one within a radius of 1 km. Initially, the local community
would provide the premises and select a local person as a part time teacher. Teaching
material and other assistance will be provided by the Central and the State
Governments, while Gram Panchayats will mobilise contribution from the local
community in cash and kind for running the school for at least two years. After the
school has functioned successfully for two years, it will be upgraded on a permanent
basis. At least 1.8 lakh such schools will become operational during the next three
years of the Ninth Plan. The resources available under the existing Centrally sponsored
education schemes will be mobilised to support this important initiative. This initiative
will provide an opportunity to the rural poor, especially those belonging to the
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes to secure education
for their children. This is the first and most important step towards their
empowerment.
 Employment: At present, a variety of self-employment and wage employment
schemes are in operation. To enhance the effectiveness of these schemes in generating
income-earning opportunities for the rural poor, Government will follow a four-
pronged strategy with the common theme of ensuring greater involvement of
Panchayati Raj institutions:
 * The existing scheme of Jawahar Rozgar Yojana will be modified to ensure
 that all funds are placed at the disposal of Gram Panchayats for creation of
 rural infrastructure. They will have the sole authority for preparation of
 annual action plans and their implementation, including the power to
 execute works with the approval of the Gram Sabha. The modified scheme
 will be called “Gram Samridhi Yojana”.
 * The wage employment programme of Employment Assurance Scheme will
 be implemented at the district/block levels, with the selection of works
 being decided by the Zila Parishads in consultation with the other elected
 representatives. The Employment Assurance Scheme presently operates
 through out the country. We will give special priority to areas suffering
 from endemic labour exodus.
 * The Gram Panchayat will maintain a live employment register available to
 the Gram Sabha and public for scrutiny. To ensure that the funds under
 the wage employment schemes are spent with the active involvement of the
 elected Panchayati Raj institutions, it is proposed that while 80% of funds
 would be released to implementing agencies as per normal procedure, the
 remaining 20% will be released as an incentive only if the State has put in
 place elected and empowered Panchayati Raj institutions.

 7
 * The plethora of self-employment programmes for the rural poor will be
 merged into a single programme called “Swaran Jayanti Gram Swa-Rozgar
 Yojana”, which will have greater participation of the Gram Panchayats.
 This will enable the implementing agencies to have greater flexibility in
 execution to meet the needs of the local people.
 These schemes will largely benefit the poor and the unemployed youth in the
rural areas, especially those belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
and Other Backward Classes.
 Shelter: The rural housing shortage at the beginning of 1997-98 was estimated at
nearly 140 lakh units, which included shelterless households and those with only
kutcha dwellings. Government’s priority will be to provide shelter to all shelterless
poor households by the end of the Ninth Plan. The task of upgradation of kutcha
dwellings of poor households will be completed by the end of the Tenth Plan.
Furthermore, to ensure integrated provision of shelter, sanitation and drinking water,
we propose to launch a comprehensive “Samagra Awas Yojana”, which will embrace
existing programmes including Indira Awas Yojana.
 18. The National Human Development Initiative will go a long way in empowering
the weakest sections of the population and improving the quality of rural life. This
will minimise the rural-urban disparities. The effectiveness of this initiative will depend
critically on the extent to which the Gram Panchayat, as an elected body, can assume
a pivotal role in implementing the various components of the programmes. I propose
to declare 1999-2000 as the “Year of the Gram Sabha” to affirm our resolve to set the
process of decentralised democracy in motion, with human development as the core
objective of planning.
Housing
 19. Turning to shelter in urban areas, we have already taken major steps for
encouraging housing development, including repeal of the Urban Land (Ceiling and
Regulation) Act. To improve the flow of credit for housing I propose the following
measures:
 * To develop the primary and secondary market for housing mortgages, it is
 necessary to simplify the present legal provisions for foreclosure and transfer
 of property. I propose to make necessary changes in the foreclosure laws in
 the housing sector through amendments in the National Housing Bank
 Act.
 * To strengthen housing finance companies, I will be proposing changes in
 the tax treatment of the income earned on non-performing assets.
 * To enhance the availability of banking funds to the housing sector, RBI will
 be advising scheduled commercial banks to lend up to 3% of their
 incremental deposits for housing finance.
 * National Housing Bank is implementing the Golden Jubilee Rural Housing
 Finance Scheme for which I announced a target of 1 lakh dwelling units
 last year. Encouraged by the satisfactory response to this scheme, I propose
 to increase this target by 25% to 1.25 lakh dwelling units during 1999-
 2000.

 8
 * The National Housing Bank has proposed a scheme, which entails a
 reduction in the interest rates for small borrowers. The scheme will be
 available in towns where Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act is not
 applicable. We will provide necessary support to NHB for this purpose. The
 details of the scheme would be announced by NHB.
 20. The development of housing in urban areas also depends heavily on the
quality of urban services. Many of our municipal bodies are at present financially
too weak to provide basic services. To encourage these bodies to improve their
creditworthiness in financial markets, I propose to accord tax-free status to a limited
amount of municipal bonds issued each year. A little later, I shall be announcing far
reaching tax initiatives to promote housing.
Industry and Infrastructure
 21. I am deeply conscious that the last two years have been difficult for Indian
industry in the context of growing integration with the world economy and the
inevitable uncertainties of the global market place. But we should also be proud of
the way Indian industry has surmounted difficult challenges and produced world-
class winners in a number of fields such as information technology and
pharmaceuticals. The process of corporate and industrial restructuring in the face
of new challenges is inevitable. To help this transition, I shall be announcing important
tax initiatives to facilitate corporate mergers and amalgamations.
 22. The Industries (Development and Regulation) Act will be reviewed and
amended so that the primary focus is shifted to development of industry rather than
its regulation.
 23. The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act has become obsolete in
certain areas in the light of international economic developments relating to
competition laws. We need to shift our focus from curbing monopolies to promoting
competition. Government has decided to appoint a Committee to examine this range
of issues and propose a modern Competition Law suitable for our conditions.
 24. The Prime Minister ’s Advisory Council on Trade and Industry has made
important recommendations regarding knowledge-based industries. The
pharmaceutical industry is one of the important knowledge-based industries where
we have comparative advantage. We must strengthen our drug industry’s research
and development capabilities. Government has decided to set up two High Level
Committees to review the present drug policy so as to reduce the rigours of price
controls where they have become counter-productive and also to identify required
support to Indian pharmaceutical companies to undertake domestic R&D. My
colleague, the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers will be making a separate
announcement regarding this initiative. Further, in order to promote foreign direct
investment in this sector, Government has decided to permit up to 74% equity
under the automatic route.
 25. While we devote our attention to the new sunrise industries, we have not
neglected established industries like textiles, which employs 380 lakh workers and
accounts for about 20% of our manufacturing valued added. The Technology
Upgradation Fund Scheme has been approved by the Government and will become

 9
operational from April 1999. For the next five years it will provide a substantial
interest incentive of 5% on loans availed by textile units from financial institutions
and banks. It will cover weaving, knitting, processing and finishing units, garment
manufacturing, cotton ginning and processing and the jute industry. The scheme is
being extended to include the spinning industry also.
 26. In the National Agenda for Governance, my Government has already
proclaimed our commitment to the Handloom sector for providing services, technical
and marketing facilities for handloom weavers. In the area of marketing, I propose to
introduce a new integrated handloom promotion scheme, Deen Dayal Hathkargha
Protshahan Yojana which would encourage processing facilities, new design inputs
to weavers and opening new avenues for marketing of handloom fabrics.
 27. Government has already undertaken important legislative and other reform
initiatives in key infrastructure sectors such as power, telecom, roads and ports.
 28. The Sethusamudram Ship Canal Project will provide a shorter sea route
between the Eastern and the Western ports of our country. I propose to provide
funds during 1999-2000 to examine the techno-economic feasibility of this much
awaited project.
Small Scale Industry
 29. Last year, I had announced a number of initiatives to improve the availability
of credit to the SSI Sector. Credit delivery to this sector continues to pose challenges
to our banking sector. I propose the following initiatives to improve the delivery
system for credit to SSI units:
 * The composite loan scheme of SIDBI and commercial banks is designed to
 ease operational difficulties of the small borrowers by providing term loan
 and working capital through a single window. The limit for composite loans
 is currently Rs.2 lakh. I propose to increase this limit to Rs.5 lakh.
 * To simplify the computation of working capital limits of SSI units, last year
 I had announced that for SSI units having an aggregate turn over of Rs.4
 crore, working capital limit would be fixed at 20% of the annual turnover. I
 propose to increase this limit to Rs.5 crore.
 * In line with the recommendations of a high powered committee appointed
 by it, RBI had advised banks to delegate more powers to branch managers
 to grant ad hoc limits, to simplify application forms, to fix their own norms
 for assessment of credit requirement and open more SSI branches. These
 measures should ease the flow of bank credit to SSI units.
 * To increase the outreach of banks to the tiny sector, lending by banks to
 non banking finance companies or other financial intermediaries for
 purposes of on-lending to the tiny sector is being included within the
 definition of priority sector for bank lending.
 * Inability to provide adequate security to banks and low recovery are often
 cited as a major constraint in flow of investment credit to SSI units. The
 problem is more acute for export oriented and tiny sector enterprises. To
 alleviate this problem, a new credit insurance scheme will be launched.

 10
Science and Technology
 30. “Jai Vigyan” is the tribute so aptly paid by our Prime Minister to hail the
achievements of our scientists. The time has come to unleash the creative potential
of our scientists and innovators at grass roots level. Only then we can make India
truly self-reliant and a leader in sustainable technologies. I propose a national
foundation for helping innovators all over the country. This Fund, with an initial
corpus of Rs.20 crore, will build a national register of innovations, mobilise intellectual
property protection, set up incubators for converting innovations into viable business
opportunities and help in dissemination across the country.
 31. Our research institutions have the capacity to evolve new vaccines that will
revolutionise the medical and health systems. We propose to set up a Technology
Mission on vaccines to provide a focus to the effort.
 32. Our country is endowed with diverse and precious genetic resources, which
need to be prudently conserved and managed. Among the 18 hot spots of bio-diversity
in the world, two happen to be in India, in the Eastern Himalayas and the Western
Ghats respectively. To coordinate policies, research, documentation and legal
protection of the country’s rights in this important area, a National Bio-resources
Board (NBB) will be set up under the Chairmanship of the Minister of Science and
Technology.
Banking
 33. Last year I had announced important decisions flowing from the
Narasimham Committee Report on Banking Sector Reforms. Subsequently, the
Reserve Bank of India has taken further follow up action. I propose to carry forward
the reform process:
 * The high level of NPAs in our public sector banks continues to remain a
 cause of concern. The Debt Recovery Tribunals, which were set up for
 expeditious adjudication and recovery of debts due to banks and financial
 institutions, have started showing encouraging results. Government has
 decided to set up 5 more DRTs and 4 more Debt Recovery Appellate
 Tribunals. I also propose to introduce a Bill in the current session of
 Parliament to make certain amendments in the Recovery of Debts due to
 Banks and Financial Institutions Act to strengthen its provisions.
 * A Working Group has recently been set up by us to devise appropriate
 strategies for dealing with the problem of restructuring weak banks including
 their NPAs.
 * The inability of banks to enter into timely compromise settlements of chronic
 cases of overdue loans leads to locking up of banks’ funds and long drawn
 litigation in recovery suits. Public sector banks will be encouraged to set
 up Settlement Advisory Committees so that such chronic cases, specially
 those relating to the small sector, are settled in a timely and speedy manner.
 RBI will be issuing necessary guidelines to the banks in this regard.
 * Our banks are required to observe RBI norms for maintaining provisions
 against doubtful and non-performing assets. These norms have been
 strengthened in recent years. To assist banks to come up to international

 11
 standards of prudential norms I shall be announcing certain changes in
 the tax deductibility of provisions made.
External Sector
 34. To strengthen our external payments situation, we need to revitalise our
exports and encourage more non-debt inflows in the form of foreign investment. The
following steps will be taken:
 * The existing scheme of export credit in foreign currency is being revamped
 to make available pre-shipment and post-shipment credit at internationally
 competitive rates and bring about major simplification of procedures. The
 RBI will separately announce the details.
 * Studies show that our exporters are handicapped by high transaction costs
 related to foreign trade licensing, tax procedures and the banking system.
 I am establishing a high powered committee under the Revenue Secretary
 to go into this problem and make concrete recommendations for reduction
 in such transaction costs within three months.
 * In order to make inflows of foreign direct investment hassle free, the
 Government has decided to expand the list of automatic approvals covering
 important industrial and services sectors. The expanded list will be
 announced separately by the Minister of Industry. Wherever FIPB clearance
 is required, henceforth FIPB will give the decision within 30 days.
 * There have been complaints about slow implementation of foreign direct
 investment (FDI) approvals. To ensure that such approvals are quickly
 translated into actual investment inflows and projects, Government has
 decided to create a Foreign Investment Implementation Authority (FIIA)
 within the Ministry of Industry, which may also include representatives of
 State Governments.
 * Households and various charitable and religious institutions hold a huge
 amount of gold in the country. These are idle assets earning no income for
 the holders, who often incur costs to ensure security. This is a somewhat
 anomalous situation considering that the country spends thousands of
 crore worth of foreign exchange each year to meet fresh demand for gold
 holding. To mobilise this idle gold, I propose a new Gold Deposit Scheme.
 Selected banks will be permitted to accept gold deposits and issue interest
 bearing certificates or bonds which, on maturity, can be reclaimed in gold.
 This would free depositors from the problems of storage, movement and
 security for the gold in their possession, while providing them with a regular
 source of income. For the country, by recycling idle gold, we should be able
 to reduce our dependence on imported gold. To encourage this process, I
 propose to exempt the interest on the gold deposit bonds/certificates from
 Income Tax and the value of assets deposited in the gold deposit scheme
 from Wealth Tax. Furthermore, any capital gains made on these gold bonds/
 certificates through trading or at redemption will be exempt from capital
 gains tax. I would also urge all State Governments to consider exempting
 movement of gold covered under the scheme from octroi, sales tax, stamp
 duty and similar levies. I must point out that the scheme will not enjoy

 12
 amnesty. The Reserve Bank will take necessary steps to implement the
 scheme.
 * In my last Budget, I had proposed a set of initiatives to strengthen the
 participation of Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) in the development of our
 country. Encouraged by their response, I now propose a few more initiatives:
 * We shall extend the facility of automatic approval for investment up to
 100% by NRIs/OCBs for all items, except those which attract notified FDI
 equity caps, or compulsory licensing or public sector reservation under the
 Industrial Policy or are reserved for the small scale sector.
 * Our major stock exchanges have screen-based automated trading in
 securities. It is now technically possible for them to open trading terminals
 abroad, which would facilitate the participation of NRIs in our capital
 markets. I have asked the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
 to work out the modalities for this purpose.
 * The existing RBI approval mechanism for NRI investment in Indian mutual
 funds will be simplified to a post-facto reporting mechanism.
Capital Market
 35. A vibrant capital market is essential for providing the much-needed funds
for our infrastructure sector. Infrastructure projects need long term funds, which,
in turn, require a deep and well-functioning debt market. With a view to modernising
the debt market and introducing paperless trading in this segment also, Government
proposes to abolish stamp duty on transfer of debt instruments within the depository
mode.
 36. Lately, there has been considerable debate on the importance of good
governance of Indian corporates. It is increasingly being realised that if investors
have to be drawn back to the capital market, companies have to put their houses in
order by following internationally accepted practices of corporate governance. This
is necessary to enhance investor confidence. To help promote this trend, I propose
to institute a National Award for Excellence in Corporate Governance.
 37. The Deepak Parekh Committee appointed by the UTI has made wide-ranging
recommendations, including for restructuring of the US-64 scheme and for granting
tax incentives. We are taking necessary action. I will come to the tax incentives
shortly. The details of the restructuring are being announced separately in a press
release. This should lift the cloud of uncertainty from the capital market and restore
confidence.
 38. My tax proposals will also greatly strengthen mutual funds and thereby
help bring small retail investors back into the capital market. It has also been decided
to set up a joint mechanism between SEBI and the Department of Company Affairs
for taking stringent action against unscrupulous promoters who raise money from
investors and misutilise them.
Expenditure Management
 39. The high rate of growth of non-developmental expenditure by Government
is a growing and critical source of concern. I propose the following initiatives:
 * The most effective and lasting solution to this problem is to begin the process
 of downsizing Government. We are making an immediate beginning by

 13
 abolishing four Secretary-level posts through a process of merger and
 rationalisation of Central Government departments. This will take effect
 on April 1, 1999.
 * To carry this process forward in a systematic way towards reducing the
 role and the administrative structure of the Government, we will constitute
 an Expenditure Reforms Commission headed by an eminent and experienced
 person.
 * In preparation for the next Budget, I propose to initiate a system of Zero
 Base Budgeting.
 * To promote transparency and curb the growth of contingent government
 liabilities, Government has decided to establish a Guarantee Redemption
 Fund with an initial corpus of Rs.50 crore. I encourage all State Governments
 to set up similar Funds.
Public Sector Reform/Disinvestment/Privatisation
 40. Government’s strategy towards public sector enterprises will continue to
encompass a judicious mix of strengthening strategic units, privatising non-strategic
ones through gradual disinvestment or strategic sale and devising viable rehabilitation
strategies for weak units.
 41. The disinvestment programme of the Government draws primarily upon
the recommendations of the Disinvestment Commission. The Commission has so
far submitted 8 Reports containing recommendations for 43 Public Sector Enterprises
(PSEs). These recommendations are in various stages of implementation. Government
will be referring more PSEs to it for its valued opinion. In 1999-2000, I propose to
raise Rs.10,000 crore through the disinvestment programme. This will help the
Government to fund the requirements of social and infrastructure sectors. Equally
important, it will lead to improvements in productivity and profitability of these
enterprises and also to the further development of domestic capital markets.
 42. Government have been providing budgetary support to Central PSEs for
rationalising manpower under the Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS). However,
such assistance has generally been restricted to loss making enterprises. There are
a number of enterprises which are marginally profit-making and which need to reduce
manpower to remain viable but do not have the resource to finance such
rationalisation exercises. Government would encourage such enterprises to raise
money from banks against Government guarantees and interest subsidy.
 43. In order to reduce the burden on budget on account of the implementation
of VRS, Government will also encourage PSEs to issue bonds to the workers opting
for VRS. Government will guarantee the repayment of such bonds and also reimburse
fully the interest payments. RBI will be requested to issue necessary instructions to
banks to accept bonds as collateral for loans to workers who may need assistance.
 44. The need for timely and reliable statistics for policy formulation and planning
cannot be over emphasised. There is reason to believe that with progressive
dismantling of the system of economic controls, the quality of data flows has weakened.
Government has decided to establish a National Statistical Commission to critically
examine the deficiencies of the present statistical system with a view to recommending
measures for a systematic revamping of the system.

 14
 45. We stand today at the edge of the second millennium. We must, therefore,
prepare for the opportunities and challenges of the next century and millennium. It
is time to seriously debate and decide on the second generation reforms that we
must put in place to make India economically strong and fully capable of competing
successfully in the evolving world order. To further this process, I plan to bring a
discussion paper before Parliament before the end of this Budget Session. My goal is
to help build a consensus on the basic issues so that we can act more decisively to
raise the growth in income, output and employment in our economy to a higher,
sustainable level.
Revised Estimates for 1998-99
 46. The non-Plan expenditure has increased by Rs.17,616 crore. There is a
shortfall of Rs.3,631 crore under Plan. The normal non-Plan expenditure of the
Government departments has increased only by Rs.2,539 crore. The other increases
are on account of loans to States and UTs against net Small Savings collections,
Rs.9,588 crore, pension, Rs.2,711 crore, interest payments, Rs.2,248 crore, and
postal deficit, Rs.530 crore.
 47. Net tax revenues for the Centre are estimated at Rs.1,09,537 crore against
Rs.1,16,857 crore budgeted, reflecting a shortfall of Rs.7,320 crore. The shortfall is
mainly due to lower customs revenue on account of both lower volume and unit-
price of imports and lower excise revenue resulting from low industrial growth.
Disinvestment receipts are expected to be Rs.8,000 crore against Rs.5,000 crore
budgeted.
 48. The fiscal deficit is thus likely to increase to 6.5% of GDP from the budget
target of 5.6% on the basis of comparable GDP estimates. However, if the increase
over budget in small savings loans to States and Union Territories is excluded, the
adjusted fiscal deficit would be 5.9%.
Budget Estimates for 1999-2000
 49. In the budget estimates for 1999-2000, the total expenditure is estimated
at Rs.2,84,003 crore, of which Rs.77,000 crore is for Plan and Rs.2,07,003 crore for
non-Plan.
Plan Expenditure
 50. The budget support for Central, State and UT Plans has been placed at
Rs.77,000 crore, marking an increase of Rs.8,629 crore over revised estimates
1998-99. Following the direction of the Prime Minister, the Plan for 1999-2000
focuses on basic human development needs such as education, health care,
social welfare, housing, and water supply. Thus, out of the total Gross Budgetary
Support of Rs.44,000 crore for the Central Plan 1999-2000, Rs.31,035 crore has
been provided to 18 Ministries/Departments covered by the Prime Minister’s Special
Action Plan. Total Central Plan outlay at Rs.1,03,521 crore will be more by Rs.15,039
crore from the last year’s level of Rs.88,482 crore. Gross budgetary support for the
Central Plan is being enhanced from Rs.38,263 crore in the revised estimates
1998-99 to Rs.44,000 crore.
 51. Compared to revised estimates 1998-1999, outlay for Plan programmes
has been significantly increased in certain priority sectors. For example, the increase
is 34.5% in the Agriculture and Allied Activities and 21.9% in Social Services.

 15

 52. Central Plan assistance to States and Union Territories in 1999-2000 is
placed at Rs.33,000 crore as compared to Rs.30,108 crore in the revised estimates
1998-99. Assistance for Basic Minimum Services and Slum Development Schemes
is proposed to be enhanced from Rs.3,684 crore to Rs.4,043 crore.
 53. Last year, I had announced a non-lapsable pool for the North East. I am
glad to inform you that we have already released Rs.98 crore for projects in the
North East out of the savings from the budget of different Central Ministries.
Non Plan Expenditure
 54. Non-Plan expenditure in 1999-2000 is estimated to be Rs.2,07,003 crore
compared to Rs.2,13,541 crore in revised estimates 1998-99. This would have actually
been Rs.2,32,003 crore but for a change in the system of accounting of loans to
States and UTs against net Small Savings collections with effect from 1.4.99. The
changeover, which is in the interest of transparency and viability of the Small Savings
schemes, is being made in deference to a suggestion in the Inter State Council in
December 1998 on delinking the small savings from Central Government’s fiscal
deficit concerns. A Committee set up under the chairmanship of Shri R.V. Gupta
has gone into the issue. Based on the Committee’s recommendations and with the
concurrence of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, the transactions will
now be under a newly created National Small Savings Fund in the Public Account,
which will reflect the Treasury Banking nature of these operations. A copy of the
Committee’s report is being placed in the library of the Parliament for Hon’ble
Members’ information.
 55. Major items of increase in non-Plan expenditure are Interest payments,
Rs.10,752 crore, Defence expenditure, Rs.4,494 crore, and grants to States, Rs.3,621
crore. A provision of Rs.1,735 crore has been made for non-Plan loans to public
sector enterprises mainly for payment of salaries and wages to the employees of sick
and convalescent PSUs.
 56. Rs.45,694 crore are being provided for Defence expenditure against Rs.41,200
crore in revised estimates 1998-99. Further need based budgetary support will be
provided during the course of the year.
Revenue Receipts
 57. Before I proceed to detail my tax proposals, I would like to highlight the
position of fiscal deficit in 1999-2000, if the existing rates of taxes and tariffs are
continued. Gross tax revenues would then be Rs.1,67,526 crore and the Centre’s
net tax revenue would be Rs.1,22,730 crore. Non-tax revenues are estimated to
increase from Rs.48,128 crore in revised estimates 1998-99 to Rs.50,475 crore this
year. The net revenue receipts for the Centre, including non-tax receipts, would
increase from Rs.1,57,664 crore in revised estimates 1998-99 to Rs.1,73,205 crore
in 1999-2000. After taking into account receipts of Rs.10,000 crore from disinvestment
of equity in public sector enterprises, the fiscal deficit would be Rs.89,713 crore.
This is unacceptably high. I shall now come to my proposals to reduce the deficit.

 16

