 SPEECH OF SHRI SACHINDRA CHAUDHURI MINISTER OF FINANCE
 INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1966-67
 Sir,
 I rise to present the Budget of the Government of India for the year 1966-67.
But before I do so I must pay homage to our late Prime Minister, Shri Lal Bahadur
Shastri. His life was given, as indeed it had been lived, in the cause of our country and
our people. With him he had brought a deathless spirit and in Me death he has made
a gift of this spirit to the nation. With this heritage we have to proceed in the service
of our people, well guided by our beloved Prime Minister and companioned by our
esteemed colleagues. With the Honourable Members I share this task.
 2. The Budget of the Government of India is a major instrument for
implementing our plans and policies. It has to be framed, therefore, in response to
current-economic trends as well as the long-term requirements of the economy. Recent
trends in the economy have been outlined in the Economic Survey which was presented
to Parliament a few days ago. I shall, therefore, refer only to a few major developments
which have a bearing m the formulation of the next year’s Budget.
 3. In many ways, the year that is now drawing to a close has been a very
difficult one. Some of the difficulties such as the inadequate performance of the
economy, the sluggishness of the capital market, the pressure on the balance of payments
and the rise in the prices of essential commodities have been with us now for a
number of years; and it is imperative that budgetary and indeed all economic policies
are framed with a view to reversing these adverse trends, At the beginning of the
current fiscal year, it was our hope that the substantial Improvement in agricultural
production and national income which had taken place in 1964-65 would make It
possible to bring about a corresponding improvement in the general economic situation.
This expectation, however, has not been realised as a result of a number of unforeseen
adverse happenings. Apart from the unprecedented failure of monsoons during the
current year, we have had to reckon with hostilities on our borders and a pause in
foreign aid.
 4. Honourable Members will recall that the Budget for the current year as
presented in February last had forecast a small overall surplus. In the early part of the
year itself, however, it became apparent that supplementary measures for raising
revenues were necessary to keep to our resolve of avoiding deficit financing.
Accordingly, the supplementary budget presented last August provided for additional
revenue measures with a yield of over Rs.100 crores for the rest of the current financial
year. Since then, the budgetary outlook has become worse. On present indications, the
current year will close with a large deficit of about Rs.165 crores. As compared with
 1

the original Budget estimates, taken together with the effect of the supplementary
budget, the revenue account is now likely to show a shortfall of Rs.53 crores. The
major deterioration of about Rs.112 crores, however, is likely to be on capital account.
I do not propose to burden Honourable Members with details of the variations that are
likely to occur on the revenue and capital account in relation to our earlier estimates.
I shall, therefore, mention only those changes which have some relevance for the
future.
 5. Under revenue, receipts from income and Corporation taxes are now
expected to show a shortfall of the order of Rs.73 crores. On the other hand, Customs
receipts are likely to be Rs.31 crores more and Excise revenues Rs.16 crores more;
total tax receipts will, therefore, fall short by Rs.26 crores.
 6. As for revenue expenditure, Honourable Members will appreciate that the
hostilities m our borders that wore started last August have made it necessary to
increase the outlay both on defence and border security. Revenue expenditure on
defence is expected to show an increase of Rs.20 crores over earlier estimates, grants
to States for border security, Rs.61/2 crores, and payments for Police Battalions raised
by the States for the Centre, Rs.11 crores, making a total increase in expenditure
under these three items of Rs.28 crores. The net result of these and other variations on
the revenue account is that the estimated revenue surplus of about Rs.335 crores will
now be reduced to Rs.282 crores.
 7. On capital account, the major developments are a shortfall of Rs.43 crores
in respect Of external assistance and an addition of Rs.100 Crores by way of loan
assistance to the States which will not be recovered during the current year iteslf. In
response to the general weakness of the budgetary position of the States as well as the
need to enable the States to undertake special agricultural programmes on an emergency
basis, Central assistance by way of loans to the State Governments for their Plans had
to be increased by Rs.40 crores. In addition, it is estimated that loans of the order of
another Rs.45 crores will be needed over the year to strengthen the budgetary position
of some of the States. An additional amount of Rs.10 crores was given to the States as
loans for the purchase and distribution of fertilizers. Loans to the States in respect Of
Small Savings will be larger by Rs.5 crores. The requirements of the public sector
concerns, notably the Heavy Electricals, the Indian Oil Corporation, National Coal
Development Corporation and Noyveli Lignite are also likely to be higher, On the
other hand, some savings in capital expenditure on a number of heads may reasonably
be expected.
 8. Honourable Members will note that the net deterioration of Rs.112 crores
on capital account is really explained by two major factors, namely, additional loan
assistance to the States and the shortfall in external assistance. The decline in Central
tax receipts of the order of Rs.26 crores represents less than 11 per cent of total tax
receipts. Further, considering the gravity of the situation that we had to contend with,

 2

the increase in revenue expenditure on defence and border security has been modest.
The shortfall in respect of external assistance is naturally a matter which is largely
beyond our control. But for the additional liability of Rs.100 crores by way of loan
assistance to the States, not recoverable within the year iteself, the overall deficit in
the Centre’s Budget this year would have been only Rs.65 crores. Even so, Honourable
Members, I am sure, will agree with me that the developments during the current year
are a matter of concern and call for a greater degree of realism in budget-making as
well as greater sense of determination in restraining expenditures, whether revenue or
capital, whether Plan or non-Plan, whether by the Centre or by the States.
 9. I cannot emphasise too strongly that the weakness of the financial position
of the States and the tendency on the part of some of them to resort to unauthorised
overdrafts from the Reserve Bank are matters which have to be remedied. The
responsibility which we have assumed so far to clear these overdrafts inevitably strains
the Centre’s budgetary position. But this strain is bound to be reflected in turn in the
Centre’s ability to help the States in respect of their Plans. Unauthorised overdrafts
and deficit budgeting by some States inevitably have repercussions on other States
which are better able or more willing to manage their affairs on a more realistic basis.
Both the Centre and the State Governments taken as a whole, therefore, have to share
the responsibility for ensuring that unsatisfactory budgetary practices such as budgeting
for deficit and unauthorised overdrafts from the Reserve Bank are avoided in future
by adopting common standards of discipline. We propose to devote urgent attention to
the problem in consultation with the Planning Commission and the State Governments
to ensure that the present unsatisfactory situation in regard to financial management
by some States does not continue.
 10. The Budget of the Government of India for the year 1966-67 will
necessarily have to be framed in the light of the budgetary developments during the
current year which I have just outlined. As mentioned at the outset, it must also take
into account recent trends in the economy and the continuing requirements of defence
and development. The year 1966-67 is the first year of the Fourth Five Year Plan. The
Budget for 1966-67, therefore, should give to the Fourth Plan as good a start as is
possible consistent with the immediate need to restore a greater measure of monetary
and price stability. Honourable Members will also appreciate that while It has always
been our policy to restrict expenditure on defence to the maximum extent possible so
as to conserve all possible sources for securing the well-being of our people, we
cannot afford to take any chances with the security of the nation, devoted though we
are to the cause of peace.
 11. Honourable Members are already familiar with the major strands in the
country’s economic situation. The substantial improvement in agricultural production
that took place in 1964-65 could not be sustained in the current year on account of
adverse weather conditions. Although no precise estimates of agricultural output in
the current year are yet available it is clear that there would be a substantial decline in
 3

the output of foodgrains as well as a reduction, in varying degrees, in the outturn of
commercial crops such as jute, mesta, oilseeds, tobacco, tea and cotton. Honourable
Members would, I am sure, like me to take this opportunity to express our gratitude to
friendly countries and international institutions, and particularly to the Government
and the people of the United States, for agreeing to supply to us substantial quantities
of foodgrains at a time of need. Even with this help, however, the availability of
essential foodgrains and agricultural raw materials during the coming year would be
considerably restricted so that it becomes more necessary than ever to restrict the
expansionary impact of Government expenditure in general.
 12. The growth in industrial production has also slackened during the current
year. During the first six months of 1965-66, industrial production increased by 7.3
per cent over the corresponding period of 1964-65. During the second half of the
current fiscal year, however, industrial production is expected to increase by only 5
per cent so that over the year as a whole we are likely to have an increase of about 6
per cent in industrial production. Our continuing developmental efforts are showing
results. Capacity in a number of industries such as those producing finished steel,
aluminium, engineering goods and chemicals has been increasing steadily and can be
expected to increase further in the coming year. On the other hand, the shortage of
domestic raw materials and our inability to compensate this by larger imports has
seriously contributed to the sluggishness of industrial production in recent months.
 13. Superficially, it might appear that our balance of payments position has
shown some improvement during the current fiscal year. In 1964-65, for example, our
foreign exchange reserves declined by Rs.72 crores. By contrast, it may well be possible
for us to avoid any decline in foreign exchange reserves during 1965-66 with the help
of a net drawing from the International Monetary Fund of Rs.11.9 crores. But we have
been able to stem the decline in our already depleted reserves during the current year
only on the basis of a highly restrictive import policy. Fresh licensing for imports for
the maintenance of the economy during the current year has been on a very restricted
basis; and this is already beginning to affect industrial production despite a substantial
decline in the inventories of imported materials and components within the country.
 14. Over the months to come, our needs for inescapable imports of foodgrains
and agricultural raw materials will increase as a result of the drought. It will also
become even more difficult than before to maintain the exports of some of our
agricultural products in the face of a decline in production. Difficult as the foreign
exchange situation has been and, indeed, is likely to be over the months to come, I
think it would be self-defeating to intensify or even to maintain the present severity of
our import restrictions. What we need, indeed, is a significantly larger flow of
maintenance imports over the coming months so that inventories within the country
are restored to normal levels and capacity already created is utilised as fully as possible.
It is only m the basis of a more liberal import policy that we can hope to give a fresh
momentum to industrial production and greater regard for efficiency all round in the
 4

immediate future. Situated as we are at present, it is not possible for us to undertake
a more liberal licensing of essential imports of raw materials and components without
external assistance in suitable forms. But Honourable Members may be sure that it
will be the constant endeavour of this Government to seek the cooperation of
international institutions and friendly foreign governments to reduce the severity of
our present import restrictions.
 15. Over a period, however, our ability to maintain imports at satisfactory
levels and to meet external obligations such as those for the repayment of debt will
necessarily have to turn m our own efforts to increase our foreign exchange earnings
not only by higher exports but also by way of increase in invisible receipts from
tourism, remittances, shipping and the like. During the first three years of the Third
Plan period, there was a rapid increase in our exports which was all the more gratifying
for the reason that it took place despite the fact that the growth of production within
the country failed to come up to expectations. The same momentum in exports, however,
has not been maintained during the past two years; and we are confronted in the
immediate future with the patent possibility that the drought might affect adversely
some of our agricultural exports.
 16. Fundamentally, we cannot give a continuing impetus to our export effort
without increasing production and productive efficiency all round and without a check
on general inflationary pressures within the country. While efforts in these directions
are required m a continuing basis in the interest of higher export earnings as, indeed,
of development along sound lines, we have not hesitated to adopt a number of measures
to give specific incentives for promoting higher exports. The Tax Credit Certificate
Schemes introduced during the year and the Import entitlement schemes which have
been in operation for some time are examples of the inducements we offer at present
to promote higher exports. More recently we introduced the National Defence
Remittance Scheme and I am happy to say that the response to the scheme has been
encouraging. It is in view of this that the scheme has been extended now by another
three months though a second look may have to be taken to lower the rate of benefit
inherent in the scheme. We shall continue to review, modify and extend the export
promotion measures that we have designed in the light of our needs and experience to
make sure that they continue to provide a strong, stable and comprehensive basis for
a vigorous export drive.
 17. With the best will in the world and the utmost effort we are capable of, we
still cannot dispense with foreign aid in the near future. We in India have always
recognised that foreign aid can at best supplement our own efforts to raise both internal
and external resources. No self-respecting nation can ever look upon external assistance
as a substitute for reasonable effort m its own part or as a continuing feature of its
economy. It is also both natural and unavoidable that the willingness of our friends
abroad to assist us will depend on the confidence that we are able to inspire in our
ability to grapple with our problems and to put such aid as we get to the best possible
 5

use. Only so can we hope, before long, to dispense with extraordinary forms of external
assistance altogether. We are hopeful that the Consortium organised under the leadership
of the World Bank will approach the task of mobilising external assistance for our
Fourth Plan in the same constructive way as it has done in the past for our Second and
more particularly for our Third Plan. At the same time, Honourable Members will
appreciate that the Plan itself and our policies in support of the Plan have to be
consistent not only with reasonable developmental goals but also with a greater
determination on our part to rely increasingly on our own strength and resources.
 18. I would like to refer, in particular, in this connection, to the need to reduce
our dependence on assistance under the United States PL 480 programme for the
import of foodgrains and other agricultural commodities. Honourable Members will
have, I am sure, every opportunity to review the measures that we have set in motion
for achieving a substantial increase in agricultural production during the Fourth Plan
period. I have to emphasise in particular the fact that our budgetary position also has
come to lean heavily on the import of agricultural commodities under the PL 480
programme. We cannot possibly regard a large accretion of resources to the Budget
from PL 480 transactions as anything but a fortuitous counterpart of our difficulties
on the agricultural front. The fact that we depend today to such a large extent on the
PL 480 programme for supplementing our budgetary resources emphasises once again
the need for caution in regard to governmental expenditure as wen as for exploring
every available opportunity for raising more internal resources.
 19. More and more, the possibility of raising additional internal resources
will depend m the growth and dynamism of the Indian economy itself. Whichever way
we look at it, therefore, It is of paramount importance to improve the performance of
the economy by raising productivity both in agriculture and industry. From this point
of view, I attach importance to strengthening and maintaining the confidence of the
private sector as also to the more efficient working and management of our growing
family of public enterprises. It is not necessary for me to dwell at any length on the
malaise of the capital market which has continued now for more than three years.
While we have endeavoured to meet the genuine requirements of private industry for
investment by greater assistance from financial institutions, there cannot be any doubt
that the revival of the capital market and a greater flow of private savings to industry
in the form of equity investment are desirable in the larger social interest. A democratic
society desiring rapid development both in the public and the private sector but averse
to concentration of wealth and economic power has all the more reason to make
investments in the private sector as widespread as possible. Growth of private industry
in such circumstances must depend more and more on the equity participation of a
growing number of people drawn from different strata of society. More widespread
equity participation would also facilitate stricter control on management in the
private sector.
 20. In the monetary field, till recently, a great deal of stringency has been felt
 6

despite the fact that the supply of money has continued to increase at a much faster
rate than the supply of goods and services. Given the developments in the budgetary
field to which I referred earlier, it is not surprising that money supply has increased at
a faster rate than what had been envisaged. But clearly, the combination of monetary
stringency and a rapid-increase in money supply is an indication of the fact that genuine
savings have not increased adequately and that a part of these have been diverted to
less desirable forms of investment. We cannot relieve monetary stringency by continuing
to increase money supply at the same rapid rate as we have done over the past few
years. To do so would only aggravate the inflationary situation in the country.
Honourable Members are well aware that the general price level in the country has
shown a significant increase of 7.6 per cent during the 12 months ending January
1966. While the Reserve Bank will continue to deploy flexibily the instruments of
monetary policy in keeping with the genuine requirements of credit for achieving
higher levels of production, we shall have to make sure that the expansion of credit
for legitimate purposes takes place increasingly on the basis of growth of deposits and
at the expense of credit expansion for less desirable social purposes. Indeed, quite
apart from these considerations, It is essential to ensure that lending by the banking
system is directed towards socially desirable objectives such as greater economic
opportunity to a wider spectrum of producers and the prevention of undue concentration
of wealth and economic influence.
 21. I may now sum up the main considerations which have guided me in
framing the next year’s Budget in the light of the developments, to which I have
referred so far. First and foremost, the Budget has to be production oriented, creating
a better psychological climate for a greater regard to savings and efficiency all round.
Secondly, while investments in progress have to be completed as speedily as possible
in the interest of better performance of the economy and while the claims of national
security have to be met, every effort has to be made to restrain Government expenditure,
particularly m general administration and m pew schemes of development with a long
gestation period. With the restraints just indicated It is proper to state that it is the
intention of this Government to establish progress and press m with such enterprises
in the public sector as are beneficient to the country. The Bokaro Steel Plant made
possible with the assistance of the USSR to whom we are grateful is one such project.
I have also endeavoured to estimate revenue and capital receipts on as realistic a basis
as possible.
 22. Coming now to the estimates of next year’s revenue expenditure,
Honourable Members would appreciate that certain increases are almost automatic in
the sense that they result from decisions already taken in the past or from Constitutional
obligations. Transfers to States m the basis of the recommendations of the Fourth
Finance Commission will, for example, lead to increase in expenditure of Rs.77 crores
under Statutory Grants and Rs.67 crores under States, share of Union Excise duties.
The cost of servicing debt will increase by Rs.42 crores and export promotion measures

 7

and the various tax credit schemes already adopted will result in an increase in
expenditure of another Rs.24 crores. If these special items and certain self-balancing
items such as PL 480 Grants, Emergency Risks insurance Scheme and write back of
Capital Grants are excluded, revenue expenditure next year will show an increase of
only Rs.46 crores. While Plan expenditure m revenue account is less by Rs.36 crores,
the increases are accounted for by Rs.29 crores under Defence Services, Rs.141/2
crores under Police, mainly for requirements of border security, Rs.111 crores under
grants for drought relief and Rs.6 crores to Union Territories to cover their budgetary
gaps. Administrative Services proper, excluding Police, would cost Rs.99 crores next
year as against Rs.93 crores this year and Rs.83 crores last year. The increase of R9.6
crores next year includes Rs.21 crores m account of next year’s election expenses.
The balance of the increase in revenue expenditure after excluding reductions under
subsidies and aid, namely, Rs.18 crores, occurs mostly under non-Plan developmental
heads, and includes committed expenditure arising out of the completed Third Plan
Schemes. Honourable Members would appreciate that the small increases I have just
mentioned represent a considerable effort at economy and restraint. Most of the
increases are in respect of obligatory expenditure or items like Defence expenditure
and border security which in view of the circumstances that we have to contend with,
cannot but be regarded as absolutely unavoidable.
 23. Disregarding certain self-balancing items, next year’s revenues should
show an increase of Rs.191 crores as compared to the revised estimates for the current
year. Customs duties are estimated to yield Rs.29 crores more mainly because the
increases in duties already made would yield results now over a full year. Receipts
from Excise duties are expected to increase by Rs.108 crores mainly in response to
larger production and clearances of petroleum products from the new refineries as
also of cement and iron and steel. Considering the experience this year and the fact
that the current year’s receipts include a considerable portion of tax from voluntary
disclosures, I have assumed that receipts from Corporation and income taxes next
year will be higher by only Rs.20 crores.
 24. Taking into account the factors that I have mentioned and a number of
other miscellaneous items, total revenue receipts next year at existing levels of taxation
are estimated at Rs.2617 crores and expenditure on revenue account at Rs.2407 crores.
The revenue surplus of Rs.210 crores next year will thus be Rs.72 crores less than the
revised estimates for the current year.
 25. On capital account, I have assumed external borrowings of Rs.460 crores
as against Rs.490 crores in the current year. This is exclusive of fresh accretion of PL
480 funds of Rs.230 crores. Market loans have been assumed at Rs.280 crores, about
the same as in the current year. However, since repayments next year are substantially
higher, the net Market borrowing at Rs.86 crores next year would be Rs.22 crores less
than that during the current year. It is, therefore, my hope that the target for market
borrowing next year will be fulfilled without any significant support from the Reserve
 8

Bank over the year as a whole. Honourable Members would recall that since last
October, we have floated emergency market loans on tap. In view of the consolidated
market borrowing programme now proposed for the next year, the emergency loans
on tap will be discontinued at the end of March.
 26. On Small Savings and Annuity Deposits, I have assumed no net increase
over the anticipated outcome of the current year. After taking account of receipts
under repayment of loans, accretions under miscellaneous debt and deposit heads and
the revenue surplus of Rs.210 crores, the total budgetary resources in sight for
total capital outlay next year, both Plan and non-Plan, would be of the order of
Rs.1835 crores.
 27. I have considered whether the capital outlay next year could not be
restrained within the limits set by resources in sight to which I have just referred.
Unfortunately, while total capital outlay next year, excluding the notional adjustment
of PL 480 loans, and loan disbursements, would show a significant reduction over the
current year’s level, it has not been possible to restrict the outlays within the strict
limits set by resources in sight. Here again, there are a number of items such as debt
repayments where an increase in outlay is unavoidable. Debt repayments next year at
Rs.314 crores would be larger by Rs.45 crores in relation to the current year. While
there is practically no increase in defence capital outlay next year, an additional
provision of Rs.20 crores is required for giving loans for the purchase and distribution
of fertilizers, seeds and pesticides and Rs.12 crores for loans for drought relief. The
provision for contribution to financial institutions will also be larger by Rs.71/2 crores.
 28. In regard to Plan schemes also, expenditures on continuing schemes have
to be provided for in the interest of speedy implementation, especially when foreign
exchange provision for their import requirements has already been made. Some of the
important increases that have been proposed in the next year relate to the Bokaro Steel
Plant and the development of Atomic Energy which have been allotted Rs.13 crores
and Rs.18 crores more respectively. On the other hand, Plan assistance to the States
and the Union Territories by way of loans has been curtailed by Rs.135 crores and
capital outlay m Railways has been reduced by Rs.59 crores. On balance, and after
taking into account a number of miscellaneous items, total capital outlay including
loan disbursement and debt repayment next year will amount to Rs.1952 crores thus
showing a reduction of Rs.296 crores as compared with the current year.
 29. In terms of Plan outlay, the Centre and the States next year are expected
to spend Rs.2081 crores, that is, Rs.144 crores less than the current year’s budgeted
Plan outlay of Rs.2225 crores. The State Plans excluding that of Nagaland will account
for an outlay of Rs.926 crores and the Central Plan, an outlay of Rs.1155 crores. Of
the States’ outlay, Rs.505 crores will be financed by Central assistance and Rs.421
crores from the resources of States concerned. The Centre’s Plan will be financed to
the extent of Rs.189 crores from the internal resources of the Railways, the Posts and

 9

Telegraphs Department, the Hindustan Steel, the Indian Oil Corporation, the Oil and
Natural Gas Commission and other public sector enterprises, including the foreign
exchange resources to be mobilised by them directly. For the balance of Rs.1471
crores, inclusive of Rs.505 crores of Central assistance to the States, Rs.56 crores for
the Union Territories and Rs.4 crores for Nagaland, as also Rs.143 crores for the
Central Plan on Revenue account, provision has been included in the Budget.
 30. The distribution of the Plan outlay under different heads takes into account
the higher priority that needs to be given at the present stage to quick yielding
programmes of agricultural development and to the speedy implementation of projects
already in hand. To a certain extent, a comparison between the Plan outlay next year
with the Plan provision for the current year is misleading in the sense that a part of the
outlay included in the Plan during a Plan period becomes committed and gets treated
as non-Plan outlay from the beginning of the next Plan period. Even so, there is no
denying the fact that the exigencies of the budgetary situation have made it necessary
to exercise the utmost caution in regard to both Plan and non-Plan expenditure during
the coming year. The gap between resources, in sight and total provision for expenditure
in the Centre’s Budget to which I will now turn has to be judged in the light of this
consideration.
 31. The overall budgetary position for the next year may now be summarised
in conventional terms as follows. The revenue account will yield a surplus of Rs.210
crores. The total disbursement on capital account, excluding the notional adjustment
of PL 480 Loans, will be Rs.1952 crores. This will be met, apart from the revenue
surplus, by internal and external borrowings of Rs.744 crores, collections under Small
Savings of Rs.135 crores, fresh accretion to PL 480 Funds of Rs.230 crores, Annuity
Deposits of Rs.44 crores, repayment of loans of Rs.370 crores and receipts under
miscellaneous debt and deposit heads of Rs.102 crores, leaving an overall deficit of
Rs.117 crores.



