 SPEECH OF SHRI RAJIV GANDHI PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER
 OF FINANCE INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1987-88
 PART A


Sir,
 I rise to present the Budget for the year 1987-88.
 2. Twenty nine years ago, presenting the country’s budget, Jawaharlal Nehru
told this House:
 “The times we live in and the problems that our country has to face do not
 permit a static or complacent approach or any avoidance of the burdens
 which inevitably accompany an attempt to advance with some speed.....
 We have to strive with all our strength for our planned development by
 conserving all our resources, increasing production and trying to ensure
 progressively a more equitable distribution, and thus to raise the standards
 of the great mass of our people.”
 These are our objectives today.
 3. When we came into office, we were fortunate in inheriting from Indiraji
an economy that was sound. After the devastation of 1979-80, the inflation rate was
brought down sharply. The growth rate was stepped up, and the infrastructure restored
to health. We have built on these successes and initiated a process of reform in areas
requiring urgent attention. This, I believe, we have been able to accomplish in large
measure.
 4. Our principal objectives are the elimination of poverty and the building of
a strong, modern, self-reliant, independent economy. In these two years we have
sharpened the focus on poverty alleviation. Direct outlays on anti-poverty programmes
were substantially increased in the last Budget. The 20-Point Programme (1986) was
announced in August. Taking advantage of high stocks of food, rural employment
programmes were expanded. Two million tonnes of cereals were made available in
tribal areas at highly subsidised rates. We launched an important scheme to enlarge
employment opportunities for the urban poor. I have extensively toured and seen the
work being done in the most backward and remote villages of our country. Talking to
the people face to face, I know how much more needs to be done. I am also convinced
that we are making progress in our struggle against poverty.
 5. Agriculture is the bedrock of our economy. Growth in this sector is also
crucial for the removal of poverty. Our farmers, farm technologists and scientists have
 1

turned India from a net-importer of foodgrains living at the margin of survival to self-
sufficiency. We are proud of them. We congratulate them.
 6. We have reinforced the policies that have proved so successful. We are
committed to providing remunerative prices, and increased availability of water, power,
seeds, fertilizers and credit to our farmers. Foodgrain production will exceed 150
million tonnes despite a poor monsoon. We have increased incentives to our farmers
to reduce our dependence on imports of sugar and edible oils. They have responded
magnificently.
 7. I am, however, concerned about the situation of agricultural labour. They
are subject to exploitation. Government will appoint a National Commission on Rural
Labour. It will look into the working conditions of this vulnerable section of our
society and the implementation of social legislation for their protection .
 8. Industry is forging ahead. Major initiatives for modernising industry and
stimulating industrial investment were taken in the Sixth Plan. Our strategy in the
Seventh Plan is to build on these initiatives to strengthen industrial performance. We
are encouraging economies of scale in production, induction of modern technology
and greater competition to increase production, reduce costs and improve quality. We
have enhanced the incentives for small scale units. There is clear evidence now that
these policies are having the expected impact on the economy.
 9. Our industrial base has widened. New industries have developed . The
small scale sector has expanded rapidly. A large number of new jobs has been created.
In the three years beginning 1984-85, the growth rate in industry is expected to exceed
8 per cent per annum on average - this has not happened in the last twenty years.
 10. We have given high priority to the important task of tax reform. Our tax
laws and rules had become complex. There was widespread evasion. Reform was
vital. Our reform of the fiscal system, undertaken in the past two years, has been
thoroughgoing. We have made tax rates and the tax structure reasonable. We have
simplified laws and procedures. We have enforced these laws vigorously without fear
or favour. This has helped the honest tax payer, and yielded more revenue than ever.
 11. The public sector is the core of our industrial economy. I am also convinced
that our public sector enterprises can be made as efficient as any in the world. I am
glad to say that the infrastructure industries in the public sector are showing distinctly
better performance. There has been a significant improvement in productivity in coal,
power and railways. The improvement in thermal power generation is particularly
striking. The plant load factor in the current year is the highest since 1976-77. The
improvement in the functioning of infrastructure has been brought about by a change
in the management culture, and better performance on the shop floor.
 12. Government will further improve the working of public sector enterprises.
We will enhance their autonomy, and make them accountable for results. Government
will bring before Parliament a White Paper on the public sector.
 2

 13. As a nation, we have good reason to be satisfied with our economic
performance. During a period when growth rates in many developing countries have
declined sharply, we have been able to accelerate growth and increase per capita
incomes. We have avoided debt problems, and have kept inflation under control. Our
food stocks and foreign exchange reserves are comfortable. These are important
strengths. But we cannot afford to be complacent. The world environment, both political
and economic, continues to be unfavourable. There are also important domestic
problems that demand our attention.
 14. The rapid growth in Government expenditure is exerting mounting
pressures on our fiscal balance. In the recent period, we have been compelled to
increase defence expenditure. We shall spare no effort nor shrink from any sacrifice
where our national security is concerned. At the same time, there are pressing
requirements for development. Any slackness in critical investments now will cost us
heavily in the future. It is a social imperative to spend on programmes which directly
benefit the poor and to provide food subsidy. We have had additional commitments
arising out of implementation of the Pay Commission’s Report. Higher relief and
grants had to be provided to several States severely affected by drought and flood.
 15. Even so, some hard choices have to be made to keep our expenditure
within our means. Government is determined to make them. The situation requires a
thoroughgoing review of our expenditure policy. Mere scratching the surface will not
help. Ad hoc and across the board cuts of the past, while providing temporary relief,
have not yielded enduring results. There is no room for waste, ostentation or
unproductive expenditure. We have to pull together and work harder than ever before
to realise national goals.
 16. We have a good record in price management. However, it will be a mistake
to take too complacent a view of the price situation. The demand and supply balance
in a developing economy is always delicate. Any external or internal disturbance can
create difficulties. It is essential, therefore, to keep a careful watch on the price situation.
 17. The balance of payments has been under pressure. We had anticipated
this and initiated a range of measures to curb the growth of imports and increase
exports. These have yielded results. Exports increased by 17 per cent while imports
increased by only about 2 per cent in the first nine months of the current year. The
trade deficit is lower than last year by Rs. 1,000 crores. But there is much more to be
done. Part of the improvement is due to the fall in oil prices and we cannot count on
this. Government will remain fully vigilant on the external front.
 18. The results of policies initiated in the last two years show that our direction
is correct. I propose to use this year’s Budget to provide a new thrust in selected areas
which will strengthen the economy and further our Seventh Plan objectives. First
among these is education.
 3

 19. The New Education Policy has been adopted by Parliament after extensive
discussions.It has been evolved from a national consensus. It is a powerful weapon to
fight poverty. It gives to the socially and economically weaker sections the means to
realise equality of opportunity guaranteed by our Constitution. It will help us preserve
our heritage and release the creative energy of our youth. It will bind together people
speaking different languages, professing different faiths and belonging to diverse
cultural traditions that are part of the composite culture of India. It aims at excellence
in all fields - science, technology, the arts, humanities and philosophic thought.
 20. To give a good start to the new Policy, I have allocated as much as Rs.800
crores for education as compared with Rs.352 crores in 1986-87. This massive increase
is a measure of our resolve to bring about an educational transformation in our country.
 21. State Governments have the primary responsibility for education. These
resources will supplement the efforts of State Governments.
 22. The momentum of anti-poverty programmes will be maintained. In 1985-
86, one million tonnes of foodgrains was provided to States as grant for extending the
coverage of the National Rural Employment Programme (NREP) and the Rural
Landless Employment Guarantee Programme (RLEGP), resulting in the creation of
62 million mandays of additional employment. In 1986-87, the additional allocation
was increased to two million tonnes, leading to additional employment of 128 million
mandays. I propose to continue the Programme of allocating additional foodgrains for
employment.
 23. The Integrated Rural Development Programme will be strengthened further.
This year, more than 3.2 million families are likely to benefit. In the coming year, an
outlay of Rs.310 crores is being provided. Combined with matching allocations of
States and credits from the banking sector, the total flow of funds under this Programme
will be 4 to 5 times greater than this allocation. Total Plan outlay for the Department
of Rural Development will exceed Rs.2,000 crores in 1987-88. This compares with
the total Sixth Plan expenditure of about Rs. 3,600 crores.
 24. Housing is high on our list of priorities. It is a basic need. It also generates
employment. We propose to launch a comprehensive programme for housing
development, particularly housing for economically weaker sections.
 25. The Central Government has again earmarked Rs.125 crores in 1987-88
for the Indira Awaas Yojana. Under this scheme, one million houses will be built
during the Seventh Plan period for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
We have decided that State Governments would be free to use the amounts allocated
to them under this Programme as seed capital for launching Indira Awaas Yojana
Societies for housing loans for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
 26. A new financial structure will be created to provide funds for housing. At
the apex level, a new national housing bank will be set up by the Reserve Bank of
 4

India with an equity capital of Rs.100 crores. This bank will promote housing institutions
at both local and regional levels. The Reserve Bank will be announcing the details
separately.
 27. The National Commission on Urbanisation, in its Interim Report, has
suggested several changes in the laws affecting housing, including the Urban Land
(Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976. This important social legislation aimed at using
surplus lands in urban areas for the common good. However, the results achieved
have been disappointing. Although 10 years have passed, less than one half of one per
cent of the land declared surplus has actually been used for construction. Meanwhile,
scarcity of land has pushed up rents and speculative profits in urban areas. The worst
sufferers have been the poor. This is not acceptable. I have asked the Ministry of
Urban Development to work out suitable legislative proposals taking into account the
recommendations of the Commission, and place these before the House for
consideration.
 28. The Commission has also recommended certain changes in the Rent
Control Acts which would give protection to the economically weaker sections, while
also providing sufficient incentive for new constructions. These changes should, over
time, bring down rents by improving the availability of housing. The report of the
Commission will be commended to State Governments.
 29. Later, in my speech, I shall be announcing certain incentives for income
tax payers in respect of housing loans taken from specified institutions.
 30. In the last two years, Government has taken a number of measures for
workers’ welfare. These include legislative changes to protect workers’ dues,
introduction of a new stock option scheme for workers, increase in eligibility limit for
bonus payments, increase in the rate of DA for public sector employees, tax concession
for investment in workers’ housing, increase in the interest rate on workers’ Provident
Funds and removal of ceiling of house-rent allowance for exemption from income-
tax. As a further step, I propose to make certain legislative changes in the Income-tax
Act to protect the dues of workers by way of Provident Fund, ESI and gratuity.
 31. We have achieved remarkable success in mobilising small savings. An
expert group, appointed by Government last year, has pointed out certain problems
with the present scheme of tax incentives on personal savings. An important lacuna is
that fiscal concessions are currently available for gross savings, with no penalty for
dissaving. It has, therefore, recommended shifting to a system which gives incentives
for net savings.
 32. I propose to introduce a new savings scheme based on the net saving
principle. To avoid any transitional problems, this scheme will be, for the present, in
addition to the existing tax concessions available under Section 80C of the Income-
tax Act for National Savings Certificates and other instruments. Under the new scheme,
 5

50 per cent of deposits upto a maximum of Rs.20,000 will be eligible for deduction.
However, in the year of withdrawal, 50 per cent of the amount withdrawn will be
added to the taxable income . Receipts under the scheme will be shareable with States.
The full details of the new savings scheme, which will be introduced in the next
financial year, are being announced separately.
 33. The capital markets in India have shown tremendous growth in the last
few years. Approvals for capital issues have exceeded Rs.5,000 crores in 1986-87.
They were only about Rs.500 crores in 1980-81. For a healthy growth of capital
markets, investors’ rights must be fully protected. Trading malpractices must be
prevented. Government have decided to set up a separate Board for the regulation and
orderly functioning of Stock Exchanges and the securities industry.
 34. Last year, the UTI had set up a Mutual Fund for investment in equity to
attract small investors. In order to widen their choice, the State Bank of India will set
up a similar Mutual Fund. I shall also be announcing certain measures later which
should contribute to the development of capital markets.
 35. I have referred to the acceleration in industrial growth. Government’s
main thrust is to modernise India’s industrial structure. Efficiency and productivity
have to be increased. Existing technology has to be upgraded. New technology has to
be absorbed and further developed indigenously. Costs must be reduced. All these
objectives can only be realised in a medium term time frame.
 36. Government have been carrying out an intensive review of individual
industries. New policy measures have been announced in respect of several important
industries, such as, textiles, jute, sugar, drugs, electronics and software. We have also
set up the Textile Modernisation Fund and the Jute Modernisation Fund. These will
facilitate modernisation of these traditional industries which provide substantial
employment. Another special development fund is being set up for jute. This will
benefit growers and workers and promote diversification and research and development.
 37. Government will continue to undertake systematic reviews of the total
policy framework for selected industries, and take necessary steps to stimulate growth
and modernisation.
 38. The capital goods industry is central to our efforts for achieving self
reliance. It needs immediate attention. I propose to introduce a package of measures
to further accelerate the growth of this industry. First, import duty rates for machinery,
including general project imports, are being adjusted. Second, in order to reduce
costs of domestic manufacture in certain critical sectors, such as, power, heavy
equipment and textile machinery, cost of certain special types of imported steel is
being reduced. I will have more to say on these proposals later.
 39. Third, a special programme of technological upgradation for selected
capital goods industries will be launched by financial institutions for the three year
 6

period upto the end of this Plan. This will cover in the first instance electrical machinery,
including power equipment and electric motors, foundries and machine tools. The
objective of this programme will be to induct the latest technology in these sectors,
improve indigenous R & D facilities for constant upgradation, and reduce costs. The
details will be announced separately by the Industrial Development Bank of India.
 40. Industries linked to agriculture have a special role in our development.
They provide markets for agricultural produce and generate higher incomes for our
farmers. I have already referred to the measures taken for modernisation of two of the
most important agro-based industries, namely, jute and textiles. Last year’s budget
had provided important tax incentives for use of certain indigenous oils in vanaspati.
I shall be announcing certain proposals to encourage the food processing industries.
This will benefit the farmer and the consumers. There are other proposals to benefit
cotton and wool.
 41. In the past year, Government have taken a number of measures to support
export industries. New schemes of cash compensatory support and customs duty
drawback have been introduced. Import duties on capital equipment for selected export
industries have been reduced. Interest rates have been lowered. Specified raw materials
are being provided at international prices. Fiscal incentives have also been extended.
Exports are now doing better. In this Budget, I shall be proposing some further measures
for increasing export production.
 42. Mr. Speaker, Sir, these and other budget proposals will strengthen the
productive forces in our society. The fundamental assumption of the Seventh Plan, as
indeed of all our Five Year Plans, is that growth and development are the real antidotes
to poverty. Direct measures for alleviation of poverty are indispensable in our society.
However, such measures can be sustained only by rapid development. This was the
message that Jawaharlal Nehru gave to the country while introducing the Second
Five Year Plan in this House :
 “We have, therefore, to lay great stress on equality, on the removal of
 disparities, and it has to be remembered always that socialism is not the
 spreading out of poverty. The essential thing is that there must be wealth
 and production....”
 43. We can grow faster only if we use modern technology. This is the only
way to deal effectively with the problems of unemployment and poverty. Those wise
men who decry the use of modern technology in the name of social justice would do
well to listen to Panditji, who in the course of the same speech, said,
 “Do not imagine that minus technological progress we are going to deal
 with the problem of unemployment.... If India is to advance, India must
 advance in science and technology, and India must use the latest techniques,
 7

 always keeping in view, no doubt, that in doing so, the intervening period,
 which always occurs, must not cause unhappiness or misery. “
 44. This then is our basic strategy - a framework of sustained growth on the
basis of rapid modernisation of India’s agriculture and industry. I am committed to
planning for socialism in India, socialism which fits in with our genius but nevertheless
socialism in its basic meaning of removing disparities and providing equality of
opportunity. This is the yardstick by which I want to judge all policies and programmes.
 45. Let me now turn to the Revised Estimates for 1986-87 and Budget
Estimates for 1987-88.
REVISED ESTIMATES 1986-87
 46. Budget Estimates 1986-87 provided for a total expenditure of Rs.52,883
crores. The expenditure in the current year is likely to exceed the original estimate by
Rs.7,445 crores owing to a number of post-budget developments.
 47. I do not propose to take the time of the House by going into details as
they have been explained in the Budget documents. I shall only refer to certain major
items.
 48. Non Plan expenditure is expected to be higher by Rs.5,508 crores including
expenditure arising from the recommendations of the Fourth Pay Commission. To
reduce the cost of carrying the buffer stock, the Food Corporation of India is being
provided loans of Rs.1,200 crores on soft terms. This will replace equivalent bank
financing. For reasons well known to the House, we have increased defence expenditure
by Rs.1,466 crores. Interest payments will be higher by Rs.800 crores.
 49. Plan expenditure is likely to be Rs.1,937 crores higher than the original
estimates. Budgetary support for the Central Plan is expected to increase from
Rs.13,617 crores to Rs.14,792 crores. The increase of Rs.1,175 crores is mainly in
Telecommunications, Railways, Petroleum, Mines, Textiles and Atomic Energy sectors.
Central assistance for State and Union Territory Plans will be Rs.762 crores more
mainly because of additional Rs.510 crores of advance Plan assistance to States affected
by natural calamities. Taking Plan and Non-Plan together, natural calamities assistance
to States will be Rs.640 crores higher than the Budget Estimate of Rs.150 crores.
 50. Coming to receipts, net tax revenue is likely to increase by Rs.1,564 crores
compared with the Budget Estimate of Rs.22,643 crores.This is a large increase, made
possible by vigorous implementation of our tax laws. Non tax revenue and capital
receipts including the contributions from the oil sector are estimated at Rs.27,836
crores against the Budget Estimate of Rs.26,537 crores. The total receipts are placed
at Rs.52,043 crores and the total expenditure at Rs.60,328 crores. Inclusive of Rs.1,200
crores on account of replacement of bank credit for buffer stock by Government loans,
the current year is expected to end with a Budgetary Deficit of Rs.8,285 crores.
 8

 51. The deficit is high and I do not like it. I have decided that the deficit in the
Budget Estimates for 1987-88 shall not be exceeded. Some supplementary demands
are unavoidable; I am instructing the Ministries and other Central Government
organisations to ensure that additional demands are offset by equivalent savings or
through measures to raise more resources. We will review the financial performance
of public sector units to ensure that targets for internal resource generation are met. I
am constituting a Cabinet Committee on Expenditure to monitor the implementation
of these measures.
 52. The overall economic situation is good. Our foodstocks and foreign
exchange reserves are quite satisfactory. We have been able to keep the overall price
situation under control through judicious demand and supply management. Along
with expenditure control, we will continue to take anticipatory action to reduce excess
liquidity and increase supply of sensitive commodities, particularly foodgrains, sugar
and edible oils.
 53. Following the report of the Committee on the working of the monetary
system, in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, it has been decided that
henceforth the Budget documents should show the budgetary deficit as well as the net
change in the Reserve Bank of India credit to Central Government. The latter presents
a more accurate measure of the monetary impact of the Government’s fiscal operations.
According to the present information, it is estimated that the change in the net Reserve
Bank of India credit to Central Government in 1986-87 will be Rs.7,250 crores, which
is lower than the budgetary deficit.
BUDGET ESTIMATES 1987-88
 54. For 1987-88, in the present situation, I have given the highest priority to
maintaining the tempo of the Plan. I have provided an outlay of Rs. 24,622 crores for
the Central Plan of 1987-88, of which Rs.14,923 crores will be provided as budgetary
support. With this order of outlay, in the first three years of the Plan, we would have
fulfilled about 63 per cent of the Seventh Plan outlay. This is a record.
 55. However, we now have to make greater efforts to achieve more for every
rupee of investment that we make. Achievement of physical targets is far more important
than just spending the money. Government must be more cost effective. The cost of
delivery of our programmes must be reduced.
 56. The Government has, therefore, given a high priority to implementation
of projects in time, avoidance of time and cost over-runs in projects, and the use of
innovative methods and new technologies. A monitoring system has been set up for
projects under implementation.
 57. Revised accounting classification to bring about one to one correspondence
between heads of accounts and heads of development used for Plan purposes is being
introduced from 1.4.1987 in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General of
 9

India. This will strengthen the planning process and help better monitoring. Equally
important is obtaining timely feed-back from grass root levels regarding implementation
of programmes and flow of benefits therefrom.
 58. In the Central Plan, a high priority has been given to programmes which
have an impact on alleviation of poverty in the rural areas. As I mentioned earlier,
particular emphasis has been given to education , the NREP, the IRDP, the RLEGP,
rural water supply, and the use of food stocks for creation of additional employment
opportunities in the rural areas.
 59. Agricultural development has a major impact in alleviating poverty. In the
Central Plan, the accent in the agricultural sector continues to be on increasing
productivity by increasing the area under high yielding and improved varieties,
accelerated transfer of new technology, increasing crop intensity, diversifying the
cropping pattern and control of pests and diseases. Some of the important programmes
under implementation are : Special Rice Production Programme, National Oil-seeds
Project, National Watershed Development Programme and National Pulses
Development Project. These projects are designed to solve specific agricultural
problems, and are already making an impact in our rural areas.
 60. Irrigation and fertilizers are two major components of programmes for
increasing agricultural productivity. In irrigation, a high priority is being given to the
completion of on-going projects and for bridging the gap between irrigation potential
and its utilisation. Fertilizer production in the current year will increase to nearly 7
million tonnes from about 5.7 million tonnes last year. The fertilizer plant at Paradeep
has commenced production during the year. In the next year, the fertilizer plants at
Vijaipur and Aonla - each with a capacity of 7.2 lakh tonnes of urea are expected to
be commissioned.
 61. In terms of financial outlays, infrastructure sectors, namely, energy,
transport and communications will account for more than 54 per cent of the total
Central Plan . In 1987-88, taking the Centre and States together, we will be
commissioning 4880 MW of additional power capacity. In coal, the output per man-
shift has improved by 11 per cent. The target for coal production in 1987-88 is 183.5
million tonnes as against 165 million tonnes in 1985-86.
 62. In the Sixth Plan, we were able to increase our crude oil production nearly
three-fold. In the current Plan, production is likely to show a slower increase and it is
necessary to accelerate investment in exploration and development of new oil fields.
The total outlay for the petroleum sector as a whole is Rs.3,265 crores next year.
 63. In order to save the time of the House, I have mentioned only a few of the
highlights of the Central Plan for 1987-88. In several other areas, such as, women and
child development, health and family welfare, youth affairs and sports, art and culture,
science and technology, environment, social forestry and information and broadcasting,
 10

this Government has taken several new initiatives to make the Plan more meaningful
to our people. These programmes are being strengthened. Necessary provisions have
also been made for industrial projects, including those in heavy industry, steel and
mines.
 64. I am also happy to inform the House that the total Plan outlay of States
and Union Territories for 1987-88 has been fixed at Rs.19,537 crores representing an
increase of 17 per cent over the current year. We have taken care of the requirements
of Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram on being elevated to Statehood. A provision of
Rs.8,754 crores has been made next year for Central assistance for State and Union
Territory Plans as against Rs.8,140 crores in the current year’s Revised Estimates.
 65. The Budget Estimate for defence is Rs.12,512 crores in 1987-88. This has
naturally cast a heavy burden on our budgetary resources, but the House will agree
with me that no compromise is possible where country’s defence is concerned. The
strength and morale of our Armed Forces are high. On behalf of this House, I assure
our Jawans of the unstinted support of the entire nation.
 66. Interest payments next year are estimated at Rs.10,650 crores against
Rs.9,550 crores in the current year. Food and fertilizer subsidies including arrears, are
placed at Rs.3,910 crores as against Rs.3,893 crores in the current year. Next year’s
Budget includes a lump provision of Rs.500 crores to cover likely increases in additional
dearness allowance to Government employees and also the increases in pensionary
charges arising out of the recommendations of the Fourth Pay Commission. This
Government - ever sensitive to the difficulties of pensioners- has decided to increase
the minimum pension and minimum family pension to Rs.375 per month. This will
benefit nearly six lakh pensioners.
 67. The total Non Plan expenditure in 1987-88 is estimated at Rs.39,266 crores.
Tax revenue next year net of States’ share is estimated at Rs.25,689 crores against
Rs.24,207 crores in the current year. Non tax revenue and capital receipts are placed
at Rs.31,243 crores against Rs.27,836 crores in the current year. The total receipts at
existing rates of taxation thus amount to Rs.56,932 crores against the total expenditure
of Rs.62,942 crores, leaving a gap of Rs.6,010 crores.
 68. I shall now turn to my tax proposals.


