 1




 Budget 1995-96
 Speech of
 Shri Manmohan Singh
 Minister of Finance
 15th March, 1995

 PART A
 Sir,
 I rise to present the Budget for 1995-96.
 2. Four years have passed since our Government, under the leadership of
Prime Minister Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao, took office in the midst of an unprecedented
economic crisis. Our immediate task was to save the nation from a relentless slide
into the abyss of falling production, soaring inflation and deepening poverty. We
dealt swiftly with the immediate crisis and we also worked towards a broader
objective of shifting the economy on to a path of rapid, employment-generating
growth. Our aim was to raise India to her rightful place in the comity of nations.
 3. Sometimes, in the heat of political debate, we lose sight of what has
already been achieved. Let me take a few minutes to outline how far we have come
since those grim days of 1991:
 · The growth of our economy had fallen to less than one per cent in 1991-
 92. We brought the economy back to a growth of 4.3 per cent per year in
 the two years thereafter, and growth has accelerated further to 5.3 per
 cent in 1994-95. Few countries can claim as quick and smooth a recovery
 from as deep an economic crisis.
 · Industrial growth had collapsed to about half of one per cent in 1991-92.
 Today, Indian industry is experiencing a vibrant, broad-based recovery
 with industrial growth of 8.7 per cent in April-November, 1994. The
 manufacturing sector is growing even faster at 9.2 per cent and the capital
 goods sector is growing at 24.7 per cent. I hope that those critics who
 predicted that our industrial and trade reforms would hurt Indian industry
 will look at the reality and think again.
 · There are signs of a strong revival in domestic industrial investment in
 1994-95 as Indian industry modernises and upgrades technology, and
 improves competitiveness. Foreign direct investment is also responding

 1

 2
 well to the new policies, with large investments flowing into key
 infrastructure sectors such as Power and Telecommunications.
 · Foodgrain production had fallen to 168 million tonnes in 1991-92. This
 year, it will be an all-time record of 185 million tonnes. Our farmers have
 clearly benefited from the policy of offering remunerative prices and have
 returned a strong production performance.
 · Public stocks of foodgrain, which provide an invaluable insurance against
 bad weather and other contingencies, had declined to 14.7 million tonnes
 three years ago. They have been rebuilt to a record level of 31 million
 tonnes, as on January 1, 1995.
 · Growth has created new jobs for our people. In 1991-92, total employment
 grew by only about 3 million. In each of the two years thereafter,
 employment increased twice as fast, with about 6 million new jobs added
 each year. The increase is expected to be even higher in 1994-95. The
 drawing room Cassandras, who predicted massive unemployment as a
 consequence of the reforms, have been conclusively proved wrong.
 · The inability to manage our external payments was the immediate cause
 of our collapse in 1991. I am sure, Honourable Members are aware of the
 remarkable change that has taken place in this area. The dollar value of
 exports fell by 1.5 per cent in 1991-92. In 1994-95 our exports have
 grown by over 17 per cent in the first 10 months. This follows a 20 per
 cent increase in 1993-94. Imports have also grown in line with the revival
 of the economy but the balance of payments situation is comfortable.
 · The fears that were voiced in some quarters that our trade policy would
 generate a disruptive flood of imports and weaken the economy have been
 shown to be completely unfounded. Liberalisation and openness have
 actually increased our self-reliance. Exports now finance over 90 per cent
 of imports, compared to only about 60 per cent in the latter half of the
 eighties. The external deficit on current account was over 3 per cent of
 GDP in 1990-91. It is expected to be less than 1/2 per cent in 1994-95.
 · At the time of the crisis, our external debt was rising at the rate of 8
 billion dollars a year. In 1993-94, the increase in external debt was reduced
 to less than one billion dollars. In the first half of 1994-95, our external
 debt stock actually declined by almost 300 million dollars.
 · Our foreign currency reserves had fallen to barely one billion dollars in
 June 1991. On March 10, 1995 they stood at over 20 billion dollars.
 · A key element of our strategy was to give top priority to strengthening anti-
poverty programmes, once the initial crisis was overcome. We have fulfilled this
promise. Plan expenditure on employment and anti-poverty programmes in the
Central Sector has been increased very sharply in the last two budgets. The allocation
for Rural Development has been more than doubled from Rs.3100 crore in 1992-
93 (BE) to over Rs.7000 crore in 1994-95 (BE). Over the same period the allocation
for Elementary Education was increased by 84 per cent, for Adult Education by 78
per cent and for Health by 91 per cent.
 4 . These indicators testify to a remarkable turnaround, in a relatively short
time. We inherited an economy near collapse four years ago. We have transformed

 3
it into an economy showing strong growth in agricultural and industrial output, a
strong revival of domestic investment, a steady increase in foreign direct investment,
renewed growth of employment and a comfortable foreign exchange position. This
is the result of the hard work of our farmers and industrial workers, our managers
and exporters, combined with the far sighted economic policies implemented by the
government under the leadership of Prime Minister Shri P.V.Narasimha Rao. What
is most encouraging is the emergence of a broad national consensus in support of
reforms, a consensus which vindicates our strategy of moving forward steadily and
surely on the path of reform.
 5 . We have come a long way, but the journey is far from over. We need to
redouble our efforts in several areas to consolidate our gains, and push the economy
to even better performance. This is both feasible and also necessary to achieve our
goals. Reforms in the areas of taxation, trade and industrial policies and the financial
sector have yielded good results. They need to be completed as planned, so as to
enhance the efficiency and competitiveness of our economy. Barriers to further
expansion of agriculture have to be identified and lifted. The public sector has to be
revamped. Industrial relations have to provide for greater flexibility in deployment
of labour. Delivery systems for social services have to be modernised, plugging
loopholes and promoting cost effectiveness. Capital market reforms have to be
widened and deepened to strengthen investor protection. Insurance sector reforms
have to be pursued with the aim of greatly widening access to insurance services
and promoting competitive and efficient customer-oriented services. We must and
will push ahead in all these areas.
 6 . There are also some weak spots, which have surfaced and need to be addressed
urgently. After the initial successes in fiscal consolidation, further progress has
proved much more difficult. The fiscal deficit increased sharply in 1993-94 and the
pressure on the deficit has continued in 1994-95. These developments must be
countered through determined action. If we try to fund every project and programme
irrespective of the revenues available, we only generate high inflation, high interest
rates which choke off investment, and a proliferation of under-funded, incomplete
projects. This approach will only jeopardise our basic objective of development with
social justice since it is the poor who will suffer most from the resultant inflation
and slow growth of employment opportunities. We must, therefore, ensure that
fiscal discipline is further improved in the years ahead.
 7 . Inflation has surfaced again as a serious problem. We had succeeded in
lowering the rate of inflation from the peak of 17 per cent in 1991 to around 7 per
cent in the middle of 1993, but since then inflation has accelerated again and
currently exceeds 11 per cent. This acceleration has occurred because of several
factors. One reason is the sharp increase in procurement prices in the previous
three years. Another factor is the shortfall in production in critical sectors such as
sugar, cotton and oilseeds. The persistence of fiscal deficits at levels higher than
they should be, has also contributed to inflationary pressure. Recognizing these
problems, we will tackle inflation on a priority basis in the year ahead.
 8 . Monetary policy has already been tightened to reduce the growth of money
supply. Interest rates on bank deposits have been raised to give greater
encouragement to savings. Taking advantage of the improved foreign exchange

 4
position, imports of key essential commodities, such as sugar, cotton, pulses and
edible oils have been freely allowed with zero or low duties to moderate inflationary
pressure. We are also taking advantage of the comfortable foodgrain stocks to
undertake continuous open market sales of wheat and rice with a view to moderating
price pressure in these items. The Public Distribution System (PDS) has been
strengthened and supplies through the PDS are being supplemented by necessary
imports of sugar and edible oils. Over the coming year, we will use all instruments
available to ensure stability in prices of wheat, rice and edible oils. Tariff and trade
policies will be deployed to ensure that domestic prices of industrial products do
not rise unduly. The consumer movement will be strengthened and Government
will be vigilant in curbing restrictive practices and hoarding. My revenue proposals,
to which I will come a little later, are also designed to check inflation in commodities
of mass consumption.
 9 . Infrastructure is another area of potential weakness. If we are to aim at
economic growth of 7 to 8 per cent, which has been achieved in other countries and
which alone can provide the jobs we need for our growing labour force, then we
need much larger investment and much greater efficiency in key infrastructure
sectors such as power, roads, ports, irrigation, railways and telecommunications.
Sound financial management holds the key to progress in this area. Adequate
supply of quality infrastructure depends crucially on the financial viability of these
sectors, which in turn depends upon the adoption of reasonable cost recovery
policies. To take the example of power, many State Governments are unable to
finance new investment in power generation because of the financial weakness of
the State Electricity Boards. Taking advantage of the Central Government’s initiative
to encourage private investment in power generation, many State Governments are
actively trying to attract private sector investments into this area. But private
sector investors are unwilling to invest in Power unless the State Governments and
the Central Government provide guarantees and counter-guarantees to reassure
the private sector producers that they will be paid for the power they generate.
Such counter-guarantees are justifiable only if they are viewed as providing
temporary breathing space, during which State Electricity Boards undertake
necessary reforms of their institutional structure, operating practices and pricing
policies. In the long run, we cannot escape the reality that the users of electricity
must pay for its cost. The same criterion holds for other infrastructure sectors also.
Once financial viability is assured, we can expect a renewed surge of both public
sector and private sector investments in these areas.
 1 0 . I shall now deal with some issues of social equity and poverty alleviation.
In my first Budget speech itself, I had emphasised that economic growth and
restructuring are not ends in themselves. They are only the means to improving
the lives of ordinary citizens. I wish to assure the House that this concern has been
central to our strategy from the very beginning. Experience in our own country, as
also from all over the world, shows that the surest antidote to poverty is rapid and
broad based growth. This is precisely what our economic reforms seek to achieve.
We also recognise that the fruits of growth will take time to reach some of the
poorest and weakest sections of our society. To ensure that they too derive benefit
in the short run, we have given the highest priority to strengthening programmes
of rural development, employment generation, primary education, primary health
and other key social sector programmes. These programmes, coupled with

 5
accelerating economic growth over the last three years, are beginning to have
desirable effects on employment and poverty. I have already mentioned that total
employment is expanding much faster than three years ago. Real wages of
agricultural labourers had declined in 1991-92 during the crisis. They had increased
above pre-crisis levels by 1993-94. Available information on vital statistics, like the
crude death rate and the infant mortality rate, also indicates a clear recovery in
general living standards after 1991-92.
 11. The message is clear: the task of lifting the age-old burden of poverty
in our society is daunting, but we are on the right track. We must persevere with
our two-track strategy of accelerating growth, investment and modernisation on
the one track, and strengthening anti-poverty programmes on the other. The Central
Plan allocations and the tax proposals in this Budget are designed to advance both
elements of this strategy. Before coming to these proposals, I would like to outline
some new initiatives aimed at strengthening the income-earning opportunities for
the weaker segments of our society.
 12. Inadequacy of public investment in agriculture is today a matter of
general concern. This is an area which is the responsibility of the States, but many
States have neglected investment in infrastructure for agriculture. There are many
rural infrastructure projects, which have been started but are lying incomplete for
want of resources. They represent a major loss of potential income and employment
to the rural population. To encourage quicker completion of projects in rural
infrastructure, I propose to establish a new Rural Infrastructural Development
Fund within the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD)
from April 1995. The Fund will provide loans to State Governments and State
owned Corporations for completing ongoing projects relating to medium and minor
irrigation, soil conservation, watershed management and other forms of rural
infrastructure. The loans will be on a project-specific basis with repayment and
interest guaranteed by the concerned State Government. Priority will be assigned
to projects which can be completed within the least time period. Resources for the
Fund will come from commercial banks which will be required by Reserve Bank of
India (RBI) to contribute an amount equivalent to a bank’s shortfall in achieving
the priority sector target for agricultural lending, subject to a maximum of 1.5 per
cent of the bank’s net credit. This is expected to create a corpus of about Rs.2,000
crore for completion of rural infrastructure projects.
 13. Our Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes citizens are amongst the
poorest members of our rural society. In the one hundred predominantly tribal
districts, NABARD will open an exclusive line of credit to Cooperatives and Regional
Rural Banks for meeting the credit needs of Scheduled Tribes. Rs.400 crore will be
earmarked for this purpose during 1995-96. NABARD will also earmark a further
Rs.100 crore for financing Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes beneficiaries
identified by the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Corporations. This amount
would be available to the commercial and cooperative banks for meeting the
investment needs of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe beneficiaries in both
farm and non-farm activities.
 14. Khadi and village industries provide crucial non-farm earning
opportunities to our rural population. I propose to establish a new scheme under

 6
which the banking system will provide Rs.1,000 crore on a consortium basis to the
Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC), which will lend to viable khadi
and village industry units, either directly or through State level Khadi and Village
Industries Boards (KVIBs). The Central and State Governments will guarantee these
loans by commercial banks to KVIC and KVIBs, respectively.
 15. The handloom sector employs millions of poor weavers. At present,
NABARD refinancing to this sector is restricted to the flow of credit through the
District and State Cooperative Banks. Henceforth, NABARD will extend refinancing
to commercial banks also for extending credit to cooperative handloom institutions.
Steps are also being taken to accelerate the flow of credit to the Handloom Centres
and Quality Dyeing Units coming under the scheme initiated last year.
 16. Our Small Scale Industries employ 14 million workers and account for
40 per cent of our total manufacturing output and 35 per cent of our exports. This
dynamic sector must be strengthened and assisted to better serve the goals of
growth, employment generation and self-reliance through exports. A Technology
Development and Modernization Fund will be established in the Small Industries
Development Bank of India (SIDBI) to provide financial assistance to quality projects
aimed at strengthening the export capability of small-scale industries. The initial
amount earmarked for this Fund will be Rs.200 crore. The financial assistance,
which would be directly provided by SIDBI to eligible small-scale units, can take
the form of either loans or equity.
 17. A National Equity Fund Scheme was established in 1987, to provide
equity assistance to tiny small scale units with projects of less than Rs.10 lakhs
and located in places with a population not exceeding 5 lakhs (15 lakhs in the case
of Hill Areas and the North Eastern Region). I propose to extend the National
Equity Fund Scheme to all tiny small-scale units irrespective of their location,
except for units in metropolitan areas. Furthermore, the scope of this scheme will
be enlarged to cover expansion, modernization, technology upgradation and
diversification. The scheme, which is managed by SIDBI, will continue to be funded
by the Central Government and SIDBI on 50:50 basis.
 18. Adequate availability of credit from the banking system is critical for
the small scale sector. The Government, in consultation with banks, has formulated
a Seven Point Action Plan for improving the flow of credit to this sector. A key
feature of the Plan is the setting up of specialized bank branches to serve the needs
of small scale units in 85 identified districts, each with more than 2,000 registered
small scale units. The public sector banks will ensure that 100 such dedicated
branches are operational before the end of 1995-96.
 19. The North Eastern region of our country merits special attention. With
a view to accelerating industrial development, a new North Eastern Development
Bank (NEDB) is being established to finance creation, expansion and modernization
of industrial enterprises and infrastructure projects in the region. The Bank will be
located within the region. It will have an authorized capital of Rs.500 crore. Initial
contributions to capital will be provided by All India Financial Institutions such as
IDBI, ICICI and UTI, providing scope for contribution from other investors
subsequently.

 7
 20. In addition to these measures for enhancing income earning
opportunities for the weaker sections of our society, I am pleased to announce four
far-reaching programmes for the general welfare of the poor, especially in rural
areas. The first programme addresses the serious deficiency in housing facilities
for the rural poor. As Honourable Members are aware, there is a major ongoing
rural housing programme, the Indira Awas Yojana. About 4 lakh dwelling units are
expected to be provided on a subsidized basis in 1994-95 to Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and freed bonded labourers. For 1995-96, the housing target is
being more than doubled to 10 lakh units. With this initiative, we will be able to
build 50 lakh rural dwelling units in the next five years. This will go a long way
towards solving the critical shortage for basic shelter among rural poor.
 21. The greatest hardships among the poor are often suffered by the old
and the weak, most of whom are unemployable. To soften the hardship in their
twilight years, a National Social Assistance Scheme has been proposed to cover the
poor and needy. One component of the scheme is the provision of a national
minimum old age pension of Rs.75 per month to people above 65 years of age who
are below the poverty line. A second component provides lump-sum survivor benefits
to poor households, on the death of the primary bread earner, of Rs.5000. The
third component aims at provision of sustenance for pre-natal and post-natal
maternity care to women belonging to poor households for the first two births. The
scheme will eventually cover about 14 million neediest beneficiaries from households
below the poverty line. Three quarters of the beneficiaries are likely to be women
needing assistance on account of old age, widowhood and maternity. The Scheme,
to be funded jointly by the Centre and the States, will be implemented by the
States through Panchayati Raj institutions. For this purpose, I am appointing a
Committee to work out the details of this Scheme.
 22. The social assistance package will be complemented by a new Group
Life Insurance Scheme of the LIC which will be implemented by Panchayats in
rural areas. Under this scheme, life cover of Rs.5000 will be provided for a modest
annual premium of around Rs.70. For poor households, the Central Government
will subsidise 25 per cent of the premium with the State Government meeting an
equal amount and the beneficiary contributing 50 per cent. The subsidy will be
limited to one policy per poor household. For the others, there will be no subsidy
on the premium. The object of the scheme is a massive promotion of social insurance
and thrift in rural areas with the active involvement of Panchayats. For poor
households, it will provide a second tier of partly subsidised security supplementing
the survivor benefit and will also inculcate the habit of saving. The LIC will be
working out the details of the scheme.
 23. Schemes to provide mid-day meals for school children have a beneficial
impact not only on child nutrition but also on school attendance. Some of the State
Governments have been operating school mid-day meals schemes. As part of the
emphasis being laid by this Government on the primary education, and taking into
account the comfortable food stocks with the public sector agencies, it is appropriate
that the Central Government should be willing to participate in phased expansion
of these schemes. The modality of implementing this, with necessary local variations,
will be worked out by a Committee to make it operational in 1995-96.
 24. Taken as a whole, these new initiatives for funding agricultural
infrastructure, promoting handlooms and khadi and village industries, expanding
rural housing and introducing social insurance will greatly strengthen the anti-

 8
poverty component of our strategy. In parallel, we will also continue with the
economic reforms, which have already yielded excellent results.
 25. The industrial, trade and tax reforms, which have created demonstrable
buoyancy in industrial production, investment and exports, will be continued, with
a special effort to improve implementation at the ground level. An important positive
development is the upsurge of investment proposals in infrastructure sectors, such
as power and telecommunications. We will ensure that the flow of investment into
these critical sectors is expedited. Reforms in the capital markets are being pursued
vigorously. Major amendments have been made recently in the Securities and
Exchange Board of India (SEBI) Act to give SEBI powers for effective regulation of
the capital markets. We propose to introduce legislation to set up Central Depositories
later this year. We will continue our efforts at financial sector reforms.
 26. In my speech last year, I had drawn attention to the report of the
Committee on Reforms in the Insurance Sector and indicated that we would evolve
a broad consensus on the future direction of reform. As a first step, I propose to
establish an independent Regulatory Authority for the Insurance industry. Necessary
legislation will be introduced shortly.
 27. I shall now briefly go over the Revised Estimates for 1994-95.
 28. The Budget Estimates for 1994-95 had placed the total expenditure at
Rs.1,51,699 crore. This is now expected to go up to Rs.1,62,272 crore, an increase
of Rs.10,573 crore.
 29. Budget Estimates for the current year provided Rs.46,582 crore as
budget support for Plan expenditure. This is being enhanced to Rs.48,761 crore to
accommodate additional assistance to the State Plans and additional allocations
for the MPs Local Area Scheme.
 30. Non-Plan expenditure in the current year is placed at Rs.1,13,511
crore which represents an increase of Rs.8,394 crore over the Budget Estimates.
Additional provision has had to be made in the Revised Estimates towards food and
fertilizer subsidies. The provision for food subsidy has to be substantially increased
by Rs.1,100 crore because of the time lag in the revision of issue prices of foodgrains.
Fertilizer subsidy is being increased by Rs.1,166 crore from the budgeted level to
cover the requirement of imports and to clear past arrears. There has been an
unprecedented rise in collections from small savings schemes this year.
Consequently, an additional amount of Rs.4,497 crore is being provided in the
Revised Estimates as loans to States and Union Territories.
 31. Gross tax revenues were estimated at Rs.87,136 crore in the Budget
Estimates. I am happy to report that our tax reforms are beginning to have the
expected impact and gross tax revenues are Rs.2,695 crore higher than the Budget
Estimates, reaching a figure of Rs.89,831 crore in the Revised Estimates for 1994-
95. This is a vindication of our strategy of tax reform, and also a tribute to the hard
work and dedication of the revenue department, without whose unstinting efforts
this result could not have been achieved.
 32. External loans, net of repayment, are placed at Rs.3,947 crore compared
to the Budget Estimates of Rs.4,279 crore.

 9
 33. Though tax collections and other non-debt receipts have been higher
than budgeted, the gains have been outweighed by much larger increases in plan
and non-plan expenditure. The fiscal deficit was originally budgeted at Rs.54,915
crore or 6 per cent of GDP. The fiscal deficit in the Revised Estimates comes to
Rs.61,035 crore which is about 6.7 per cent of GDP. However, nearly three quarters
of this deterioration is due to the extraordinary rise in small saving collections, 75
per cent of which are passed on to the States. Thus the bulk of the deterioration in
the fiscal deficit is not on account of increased expenditure of the Central
Government, but only a reflection of larger small savings as compared to the Budget
Estimates, which are on lent to the States. If this element is excluded, the Centre’s
fiscal deficit would be only 6. 2 per cent of GDP compared to the Budget target of
6 per cent.
 34. The Tenth Finance Commission (TFC) submitted its Report covering
the five year period of 1995-2000, on November 26, 1994. The Report recommends
a substantial increase in transfers to the States. Despite the severe constraint on
the Centre’s resources, the Government has accepted the recommendations of the
Commission and these are being implemented with effect from 1995-96. The flow
of funds based on Finance Commission devolution and transfers will increase by
about 22 per cent, from Rs.28,832 crore in 1994-95 to Rs.35,055 crore in 1995-96.
We expect the States to use the additional resources for the purposes for which
they are released and ensure that the fruits of the schemes reach the intended
beneficiaries.
 35. I now turn to the Budget Estimates for 1995-96. The total expenditure
is estimated at Rs.1,72,151 crore. The total budgetary support from the Central
Government’s budget to the Central and the State Plans is being placed at Rs.48,500
crore in 1995-96, which represents an increase of Rs.1,918 crore over the level in
Budget Estimates 1994-95.
 36. The total outlay of the Central Plan 1995-96 has been increased to
Rs.78,849 crore from Rs.70,141 crore in the Budget Estimates 1994-95. The
budgetary support for the Central Plan 1995-96 has been increased to Rs.28,994
crore from Rs.27,278 crore in the Budget Estimates 1994-95. The balance will be
met by the internal and extra budgetary resources of the Central Public Sector
Enterprises to the extent of 63 per cent, as against 61 per cent in Budget Estimates
1994-95.
 37. I am providing Rs.19,506 crore as Central Plan assistance to States
and Union Territories in the Budget Estimates 1995-96 compared to Rs.19,304
crore in Budget Estimates 1994-95. It is relevant to note that the plan transfer to
States and UTs for 1994-95 include Rs.2,680 crore as part of the Ninth Finance
Commission decisions. Tenth Finance Commission has not suggested any transfer
on Plan Account. Thus the discretionary plan transfer by the Centre to States and
UT goes up from Rs.16,624 crore in 1994-95 to Rs.19,506 crore in 1995-96, yielding
an increase of over 17%. This amount has to be viewed in the background of
substantial increase in transfers to the States as a result of the recommendations
of the Tenth Finance Commission.
 38. In line with our strategy of giving priority to programmes which directly
benefit the poor, budgetary support to the Central Plan is being concentrated on
Rural Development, Employment and Poverty-alleviation programmes and human
resource development sectors. As Honourable Members are aware, the directly
targeted Rural Development programmes for eradicating rural poverty have received

 10
special emphasis and enhanced outlays during the reform process. In the last
budget, the outlay for the Department of Rural Development was raised to Rs.7,010
crore, more than double the amount of Rs.3,100 crore budgeted two years earlier
in 1992-93. For 1995-96, this allocation is being further increased to Rs. 7,700
crore. With this, we will be well on the way to meeting the Eighth Five Year Plan
target of Rs.30,000 crore of Central Plan outlay for Rural Development. It is estimated
that the Rural Employment programmes under the Department of Rural Development
generated about 800 million mandays of employment in 1991-92. In 1995-96,
these programmes are estimated to generate 1290 million mandays of employment.
 39. The Annual Plan of 1995-96 will continue to lay stress on improving
productivity in the agricultural sector and diversifying the pattern of agriculture
into higher value generating farm schemes like horticulture. Revitalising the
cooperatives for providing credit inputs and extension support, marketing and
processing would be another thrust area. The flow of agricultural credit through
cooperatives is projected at Rs.14,000 crore in 1995-96, as compared to an estimate
of about Rs.12,000 crore in 1994-95. Assistance will be given to 220 cooperative
societies for women and 330 cooperative societies for weaker sections. It is expected
that over 38,000 hectares would be brought under drip irrigation. Integrated pest
management, which is eco-friendly, will be extended and 1500 training-cum-
demonstrations will be organised to train over 50,000 farmers. 40,000 hectares are
expected to be covered under intensive fish farming.
 40. The spread of educational opportunities is essential for social and
economic development. Despite severe budgetary constraints, the Plan Outlay for
Education in 1995-96 is being increased from Rs.1,541 crore in 1994-95 to Rs.1,825
crore in 1995-96. Elementary Education is particularly important, especially for
improving the position of girls and women in our society. The outlay for Elementary
Education is being increased substantially by 24.5 per cent to Rs.651 crore. Under
Operation Black Board, primary schools with enrolment of more than 100 children
are being provided a third teacher. The allocation for Operation Black Board is
being increased by 30 per cent for 1995-96. The allocation for post-matric
scholarships for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes has been increased from
Rs.105 crore in 1994-95 to Rs.145 crore in 1995-96. This will help additional
coverage of deserving students. To assist the State Governments, Government of
India is passing on all the external assistance received for Primary Education as
grants to State Governments, irrespective of the terms on which the assistance is
received by the Central Government.
 41. The combined Plan Outlay for the Departments of Health and Family
Welfare is being increased to Rs.2,251 crore in 1995-96. The allocation for the
National Malaria Eradication Programme for 1995-96 is being increased by 32 per
cent to Rs.139 crore, so that coverage can be extended to 163 million people with
top priority being accorded to tribal areas and North Eastern States where the
problem of malaria has been endemic. Rs.80 crore is being allocated in 1995-96 for
the Leprosy Control Programme which aims to eliminate transmission of this disease
by the year 2000. An allocation of Rs.726 crore is proposed for Family Welfare
Services directly meant for rural areas, including Rs.160 crore for maintenance of
5435 Rural Family Welfare Centres and Rs.190 crore for the maintenance of 9577
Rural Sub-Centres.

 11
 42. Total non-Plan expenditure in 1995-96 is estimated to be Rs.1,23,651
crore. The outlay for Defence has been increased to Rs.25,500 crore, keeping in
mind national security imperatives. An amount of Rs.5,400 crore is being earmarked
for fertiliser subsidy in 1995-96. In addition, Rs.500 crore has been earmarked for
cheaper supply of phosphatic and potassium fertilisers to farmers, thus raising the
total effective fertiliser subsidy to Rs.5,900 crore. Food subsidy receives an allocation
of Rs.5,250 crore.
 43. Turning to revenue receipts, gross tax revenues at the existing rates of
taxation, are estimated at Rs.1,03,762 crore. The payment of share of taxes to
States is placed at Rs.29,388 crore. The net revenue receipts to the Centre, including
non-tax revenues are estimated to increase from Rs.86,084 crore in 1994-95, to
Rs.1,00,787 crore in 1995-96.
 44. In the area of capital receipts, traditional market borrowings are put at
Rs.3,700 crore. Other medium and long term loans are estimated at Rs.19,000
crore and short term loans at Rs.4,387 crore. Net external assistance is estimated
at Rs.4,456 crore. As in previous years, the Government intends to continue the
process of disinvestment of the equity of public sector enterprises. The Budget
Estimates provide for receipts from disinvestment of Rs.7,000 crore, a significant
increase from the figure of Rs.5,237 crore in the Revised Estimates for 1994-95.
 45. Taking into account other changes in receipts and expenditure, total
receipts at existing rates of taxation are estimated at Rs.1,67,151 crore, while total
expenditure is estimated at Rs.1,72,151 crore. This results in a budget deficit of
Rs.5,000 crore. The fiscal deficit emerging from these estimates for 1995-96 will be
Rs.57,634 crore, which will be about 5.5 per cent of GDP. I would have liked to do
better, but on balance I feel that a fiscal deficit of this order can be absorbed, if the
existing growth momentum is maintained.
