 1




 Budget 1997-98
 Speech of
 Shri P. Chidambaram
 Minister of Finance


 28th February, 1997
 PART A
 Sir,
 I rise to present the Budget for the year 1997-98.
 Introduction
 2 . The government headed by Prime Minster Shri Deve Gowda completes nine
months today. When I stood before this House on July 22, 1996, this House received
my proposals with a mixture of wonder, curiosity and scepticism. I was, after all,
the Finance Minister of the genuine coalition government at the Centre. I was also
the first Finance Minister who belonged to an avowed regional party, albeit with a
national outlook.
 3 . Hon’ble Members will indulge me for a few minutes while I reflect on those
eventful days in May 1996. One national party acknowledged that it had lost its
claim to form the government. Another tried, but failed. It is in that situation that
regional parties, and certain parties with a larger national presence, came together
to form the United Front government. These parties-long regarded as children of a
lesser God-have demonstrated that, given the opportunity, they can form a
government not only at the State level but also at the Centre. Inspired by the idea
off a truly cooperative federal polity, Chief Ministers have assembled, more often
than ever before, at the Inter-State Council, the National Development Council and
at the Special Conferences to formulate national policies. The formulations of the
government by the United Front and our efforts to take decisions by a national
consensus, in the fiftieth year of India’s independence, have deepened and broadened
Indian democracy.
 4 . Hon’ble Members will find that there is a strong continuity between my first
Budget and the present one. The foundation of the Budget remains the Common
Minimum Programme. The experience of the last eight months has demonstrated
the enormous strengths of the programme. Drawing on the CMP, my first Budget
articulated seven broad objectives. These objectives embraced vital elements such
as growth, basic minimum services, employment, macroeconomic stability,

 1

 2
investment (particularly in infrastructure), human development and a viable balance
of payments. I believe these objectives remain as valid today as they were eight
months ago.
 July 1996 Budget Promises
 5 . On the last occasion, I had made over forty specific promises on policies and
programmes. I have carefully taken stock of the situation, and Hon’ble Members
will be pleased to know that I have fulfilled all these promises, save one, to which
I shall refer presently. To recall the more important ones, I am happy to state that
we have
 · Provided an additional sum of Rs. 2466 crore to the States for seven Basic
 Minimum Services;
 · Funded the Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF)-II with Rs.
 2500 crore;
 · Expanded the list of industries eligible for automatic approval for foreign
 equity investment;
 · Set up the Disinvestment Commission and the Tariff Commission;
 · Introduced the Jeevan Suraksha and the Jan Arogya insurance schemes;
 and
 · Launched the Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme.
 6 . The one commitment that I have been unable to keep is to set up an
Expenditure Management and Reforms Commission. I failed because I wanted an
A team and I was not content with a B team. Key members of the A team are in this
House and in the Rajya Sabha, and they still elude me. I shall keep trying. Meanwhile,
I have not let up on my resolve to keep expenditure within the Budget, and I have
achieved a fair measure of success.
 Current Economic Situation
 7 . The Economic Survey 1996-97 was laid in the Parliament a few days ago. It
provided a detailed and balanced account of the state of the economy. There is
indeed much to be done, but there is also much to be proud of. The outstanding
feature of the economy is that the GDP has been growing during the last three
years at an average rate of 7%. I salute the farmers, the workers, the entrepreneurs
and the service providers who have made this possible.
 8 . The positive features of our economic performance in 1996-97 include:
 · Continued high economic growth at 6.8%;
 · A strong recovery of growth in agriculture and allied sectors to 3.7%, after
 a disappointing minus 0.1% in 1995-96;
 · Rebound in foodgrains production to 191 million tonnes;
 · Manufacturing sector growth at 10.6%; and
 · A sizeable build up in our foreign currency reserves from US$ 17.0 billion
 to US$ 19.5 billion as on February 27, 1997.

 3
 9 . I shall not be true to myself or to the country if I did not highlight the areas
of weakness. Two areas of great concern are the sharp drop in domestic crude oil
production and the sluggish performance of the power sector. Other matters of
concern include a deceleration in the growth of exports, a rise in the rate of inflation
and a volatile capital market. Government has addressed these concerns through
some far-reaching initiatives in the last three months. I have also fresh proposals
in this Budget.
 10. Macroeconomic management involves, inevitably, striking a balance
between various objectives and considerations. As Hon’ble Members are aware, in
1995-96, the growth in money supply was reduced sharply to 13.2%. Although this
helped to contain inflation, it also led to high real interest rates, a widespread
perception of a liquidity crunch and a slackening of investment proposals. Since
July 1996, corrective action has been taken which has eased the availability of
money and brought down the interest rates. The long-delayed increase in the prices
of petroleum products and supply-side problems, arising mainly out of lower
production and lower procurement of wheat in the last season, exerted pressure on
the price level. Government has taken a number of steps to maintain price stability.
Paddy production and procurement in the Kharif season have been satisfactory
and we have adequate stocks of rice. The Rabi wheat crop is also very promising
and steps will be taken to maximise procurement. At the same time, I would like to
make it clear that, if necessary, government will not hesitate to import wheat and
other essential articles to counter the pressure on prices. Maintaining price stability
is high on the agenda of this government.
 11. Apart from supply side management, we have to adopt prudent fiscal
and monetary policies that will stabilise prices. For the year 1997-98, the government
and RBI will act in concert towards a further reduction in the fiscal deficit,
containment of the growth of money supply within 16% and adoption of a liberal
import policy for essential commodities. Our goal is to break inflationary expectations
and reduce the rate of inflation from the present level.
 Poverty Alleviation Programmes
 12. Our fight against poverty is not a game in populism. It is a battle at the
grassroots level. It is a battle in which, I believe, all of us ought to be on the side
of the poor. Those who are poor are those who do not have land or water or
education or opportunity. Our programmes, therefore, revolve around the concerns
of the poor. For example
 · The flagship programme of the Prime Minister is the Basic Minimum
 Services plan. As against Rs. 2466 crore in the current year, I propose to
 provide Rs. 3300 crore for this programme in 1997-98. This will include
 Rs. 330 crore for slum development.
 · The provision for the Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme is being
 enhanced from Rs. 900 crore to Rs. 1300 crore in 1997-98.
 · The Ganga Kalyan Yojana is intended to support farmers to take up
 schemes for groundwater and surface water utilisation through a mixture
 of subsidy, maintenance support and credit arrangements. Rs. 200 crore

 4
 is being provided in 1997-98.
 · On august 15, 1997, the Prime Minister will inaugurate the Kasturba
 Gandhi Shiksha Yojana, a programme to establish special schools for girl
 children in the districts which have particularly low literacy rate. I have
 placed Rs. 250 crore in the Budget for 1997-98.
 · All current schemes, addressed to different target groups such as PMRY,
 IRDP, NRY etc., will be reoriented to provide skill-based training,
 entrepreneurship development and subsidy-linked bank credit to 1 million
 youth to empower them to start viable small business.
 13. Our government believes that poverty alleviation programmes are
important instruments in the fight against poverty. While maintaining the large
outlays for these programmes, it is necessary to rationalise their number and make
them more focussed and effective. The Planning Commission is now engaged in a
comprehensive exercise and the revised portfolio of poverty alleviation programmes
will be implemented with effect from April 1, 1997.
 Rural Credit
 14. Agriculture is the lifeblood of our economy. The CMP calls for a doubling
of the flow of credit to agriculture and agro-industries within five years. In 1996-
97, the first year of this government, it is estimated that credit flow to agriculture
will increase from about Rs. 22,000 crore to nearly Rs. 28,600 crore-an increase of
an unprecedented Rs. 6,600 crore.
 15. Hon’ble Members will be glad to know that the Rural Infrastructure
Development Fund (RIDF) has proved to be popular and successful. Under RIDF-
I, Rs. 2,000 crore was sanctioned for 4,530 projects. By March 1997, disbursements
will amount to about Rs. 1,400 crore. Under RIDF-II, 8,387 projects worth over Rs.
2,500 crore have been sanctioned. RIDF-III will be launched in 1997-98 and Rs.
2,500 crore will be provided. I urge the States to continue to make the best use of
these funds.
 16. The policy of recapitalising the Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) will
continue next year. I am providing Rs. 270 crore for this purpose. I also intend to
allow a greater role to sponsor banks in the ownership and management of RRBs.
 17. NABARD is being strengthened. NABARD has been given Rs. 500 crore
as advance additional share capital-Rs. 100 crore by government and Rs. 400 crore
by RBI-in the current year. The share capital will be augmented by a similar allocation
in 1997-98. I am also glad to announce that, as promised last year, NABARD has
promoted and incorporated this month, state level agricultural development finance
institutions in three States as joint ventures. More will be incorporated next year.
 Controls on Agriculture
 18. The CMP said that all controls on agricultural products will be reviewed
and, wherever found unnecessary, will be abolished. Only some regulations are by
the Central government and a beginning is being made by abolishing a few. The
Rice Milling Industries (Regulation) Act, 1958 and the Ginning and Pressing Factories
Act, 1925 will be repealed. Licensing, price control and requisitioning under the
Cold Storage Order, 1964 will be removed. The Edible Oils and Edible Oil Seeds
Storage Control Order, 1977 and the Cotton Control Order, 1986 will be invoked

 5
only in well-defined emergency situations. Domestic futures trading would be
resumed in respect of ginned and baled cotton, baled raw jute and jute goods. An
international Castor Oil Futures Exchange will be set up. I urge State governments
to follow this lead and abolish as many controls as possible.
 Small Scale Industry
 19. As Hon’ble Members are aware, government has recently enhanced the
investment ceiling for plant and machinery of small scale industries (SSIs) to Rs. 3
crore and of tiny units to Rs. 25 lakhs. In order to ensure that credit is available
to all segments of the now-enlarged SSI sector, the RBI is issuing instructions that
out of the funds normally available to the SSI sector, 40% will be reserved for units
with investment in plant and machinery between 5 lakhs, 20% for units with
investment between Rs. 5 lakhs and Rs. 25 lakhs and the remaining 40% for other
SSI units.
 20. Government also announced recently that it will examine carefully the
other recommendations of the Abid Hussain Committee on the SSI sector. With a
view to reduce wastage in agricultural commodities, improve quality and hygiene
and promote exports, the Advisory Committee on reservation and dereservation
has recommended that 14 items, now reserved for manufacture in the SSI sector,
may be dereserved. 822 items would still remain reserved for production in the SSI
sector. Government has accepted these recommendations. The dereserved items
include rice-milling, dal milling, poultry feed, vinegar, synthetic syrups, biscuits,
ice cream, a variety of automobile parts and corrugated paper and boards. It is
expected that new investment and improved technology will flow into these
businesses.
 Housing
 21. A constraint on adding to the housing stock of the country is the
Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976. It is the intention of the government
to move a Bill for amending the Act in this session of the Parliament.
 22. Indira Awas Yojana was launched to build houses for the poor in rural
areas. Housing finance companies provide credit, but the bulk of such credit flows
into the urban and semi-urban areas. There are some rural housing credit
programmes but they lend meagre amounts up to Rs. 10,000. There is virtually no
source of credit for the farmer who wishes to build a modest house on his freehold
land or to improve or add to his old dwelling. This gap must be filled. In consultation
with the National Housing Bank (NHB) and others I have worked out a plan. Loans,
up to Rs. 2 lakhs, will be given for building houses on freehold land in rural areas
at normal rates of interest, subject to the borrower putting in one-third of the value
of the house. NHB has been requested to prepare a scheme in which other
organisations will also participate. The Prime Minister will launch the scheme on
August 15, 1997 and it is our goal to sanction 50,000 loans in the first year.
 Employees’ Provident Fund & Gratuity
 23. The Central Board of trustees of the Employees’ Provident Fund (EPF)
has made specific proposals to make the EPF schemes more attractive. Government
has also looked at the matter from the point of view of augmenting savings. I am
happy to announce the following decisions:
 · The rate of contribution in all industries and establishments will be
 increased from 8.33% to 10% for both employers and employees with
 effect from March 1, 1997.

 6
 · In the scheduled industries where the rate of contribution is now 10%,
 the Act will be amended to make the rate 12% for both employers and
 employees.
 · The requirement of keeping 20% of the incremental PF amounts in the
 Special Deposit Scheme (SDS) will now be withdrawn with effect from
 March 1, 1997 and the Board of Trustees will be free to invest this portion
 of the funds in any other kinds of permitted securities.
 24. In 1995, the Central government enhanced the ceiling on the amount
of gratuity payable from Rs. 1 lakh to Rs. 2.5 lakh for Central government employees.
I am now pleased to announce that the benefit will be extended to all employees
covered under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, which will be amended for this
purpose.
 Public Sector Autonomy
 25. The CMP promised that “the United Front government will identify
public sector companies that have comparative advantages and will support them
in their drive to become global giants.” To begin with, nine well-performing public
sector enterprises, the Navratnas, have been identified. These are IOC, ONGC,
HPCL, BPCL, IPCL, VSNL, BHEL, SAIL and NTPC. The Industry Minister will shortly
unveil a package of measures that will help them achieve this objective. He will also
make a full statement on managerial and commercial autonomy to all PSUs.
 26. In the meanwhile, government has decided to delegate more monetary
powers to the Boards of profit-making enterprises. For these PSUs, the existing
limits for capital expenditure that can be incurred without the prior approval of the
government is being doubled straight-away, and where the gross block is over Rs.
500 crore, the limit will be Rs. 100 crore.
 Disinvestment
 27. The Disinvestment Commission was constituted in August, 1996 and
40 PSUs were referred to the Commission for advice. The Commission has submitted
its first report. It has made specific recommendations in respect of three companies.
We intend to proceed with the disinvestment in these companies along the lines
suggested by the Commission. While the Commission will make further reports
every month, a second batch of PSUs has been referred to the Commission. As the
Commission has observed “The essence of a long-term disinvestment strategy should
be not only to enhance budgetary receipts, but also minimise budgetary support
towards unprofitable units while ensuring their long-term viability and sustainable
levels of employment in them.” Government agrees with this view and I appeal to
Hon’ble Members to take a positive view of disinvestment.
 Oil and Gas
 The country’s demand for petroleum products is growing at over 8% per annum,
which is faster than the growth of domestic supply. We cannot choke this growth.
At the same time, we must reduce our dependence on imported petroleum products.
There is no real alternative to increasing the supply. Just 6 of the 26 basins that
have potential for oil and gas in India have been explored, and that too only partially.
The Minister for State for Petroleum and Natural Gas will be making a detailed

 7
statement on the new exploration licensing policy (NELP) shortly. The highlights of
the policy are the following:
 · Companies, including ONGC and OIL, will be paid the international price
 of oil for new discoveries made under the NELP;
 · Royalty payments will be fixed on an ad valorem basis instead of the
 present system of specific rates;
 · Royalty payments for exploration in deep waters will be charged at half
 the rate for offshore areas for the first seven years after commencement of
 commercial production;
 · Freedom for marketing crude oil and gas in the domestic market;
 · Tax holiday for seven years after commencement of commercial production
 for blocks in the North-East region;
 · ONGC and OIL will get the same duty concessions on import of capital
 goods under the NELP as private production sharing contracts;
 · Cess levied under the Oil Industry Development Act, 1974 will be abolished
 for the new exploration blocks; and
 · A separate petroleum tax code will be put in place as in other countries to
 facilitate new investments.
 It is my fervent hoe that Indian and foreign companies will respond positively to
this package of measures.
 29. In order to ensure that adequate domestic refining capacity is created,
I propose to allow refineries to import capital goods during the Ninth Plan period at
a concessional duty on par with the fertiliser sector. Domestic capital goods suppliers
will also get deemed export status.
 Infrastructure
 30. The Infrastructure Development Finance Company has been
incorporated. Section 80IA of the Income Tax Act grants five year tax holiday for
certain infrastructure projects. Last month, I announced that telecommunications
will qualify as infrastructure. I now propose to add Oil Exploration and Industrial
Parks to this category.
 31. I am also glad to announce that the vexed question of assignability of
telecom licenses has been resolved and that tripartite agreements are proposed to
be entered into among the Department of Telecommunications, the licensee and
the lenders.
 32. As Commerce Minister, I proposed in the Exim Policy that supply of
goods to oil, gas and power projects, if the supplies are made under the procedure
of international competitive bidding, should be given the benefits of “deemed exports’.
As Finance Minister, I am glad to accept this wholesome proposal. Details are being
notified separately.
 33. The National Highway Authority of India (NHAI) is now geared to
implement the new policy on roads and highways. I propose to enhance budget
support for NHAI to Rs. 500 crore which is a significant step up from Rs. 200 crore
provided in the current year.

 8
 Foreign Investment
 34. Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs) continue to repose great confidence
in India. Net FII investment in India is now over US$ 7 billion. During the course
of this year I have expanded the opportunities for such investments. I propose to
take one more step at the instance of Indian companies. The limit of aggregate
investment in a company by FIIs, NRIs and NRI-OCBs is now 24%. I propose to
allow companies to raise this limit to 30%, subject to the condition that the Board
of Directors of the company approves the limit and the general body of the company
passes a special resolution in this behalf.
 3 5 Venture capital funds are important vehicles for stimulating investments in
new ventures. Under the present guidelines they can invest upto 5% of their corpus
in the equity of any single company. This is unduly restrictive. The limit is being
increased to 20%.
 Capital Market
 36. Over 20 million Indians have invested their savings in the capital market.
The establishment of the first Depository was an important step taken to bring the
Indian capital market upto world standards and to protect the interests of the
investors. SEBI was asked to suggest more measures. The committee appointed by
me draft a new Companies Bill has also made valuable suggestions. After considering
these suggestions, I propose to accept five recommendations:
 · The principle of buy-back of shares by companies subject to certain
 conditions will be introduced in the Companies Act;
 · The provisions of Sections 370 and 372 of the Companies Act will be
 merged and an overall ceiling of 60% will be kept for inter-corporate
 investment and loans;
 · The Companies Act will be amended to provide for nomination facilities
 for holder of securities;
 · Companies raising funds from the capital market will be required to give
 an annual statement disclosing the end-use of such funds; and
 · One time permission will be given to stockbrokers to corporatise their
 business without attracting tax on capital gains, which will be exempted.
 37. I am of the firm view that markets will prosper when economic growth
continues to be strong, the fiscal deficit is reduced, interest rates decline and
investors are reassured that their interests are secure.
 FERA and Money Laundering
 38. As we progress towards a more open economy with greater trade and
investment linkages with the rest of the world, the regulations governing foreign
exchange transactions also need to be modernised. It is generally acknowledged
that the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 needs to be replaced by a new law
consistent with full current account convertibility and our objective of progressively
liberalising capital account transactions. Hence, I propose to introduce, later this
year, a Bill titled The Foreign Exchange Management Act. A RBI-appointed group is
expected to complete the drafting of the Bill shortly.
 39. While FERA is being replaced, we will not let up in our effort to curb
the laundering of ill-gotten money. A Bill dealing with money laundering is under
preparation and I propose to introduce it during this session of the Parliament.

 9
 Capital Account Convertibility
 40. A little while ago I made a reference to capital account convertibility.
We are proud of our foreign exchange earners. They have been given the facility of
the Export Earners Foreign Currency (EEFC) Account. At present, the total amount
in these accounts is a modest Rs. 2000 crore. I propose to expand the scope of the
account by allowing the following facilities:
 · To open offices abroad and to meet the expenses thereof; and
 · To make investments from the balance in the account in overseas joint
 ventures upto the limit of US$ 15 million, without reference to the RBI.
 41. I also believe that the time has come for a preparatory work towards
capital account convertibility. This is a cherished goal. It is also a matter of great
sensitivity. Hence, I shall not make any commitment. For the present, I am asking
RBI to appoint a group of experts to lay out the road map towards capital account
convertibility, prescribe the economic parameters which have to be achieved at
each milestone and work out a detailed time table for achieving the goal. I believe
the appointment of such a group will send a powerful signal to the world about our
determination to join the ranks of the frontline nations.
 Science and Technology
 42. My last budget was viewed in certain quarters as science and technology-
friendly. Flattery has its rewards, and I intend to strengthen my friendship with the
scientific community. I propose to take the following initiatives:
 · The scheme to match every additional commercial rupee earned by CSIR
 and ICAR laboratories, as well as the IITs, will continue on a permanent
 basis.
 · The Technology Development Board, established to accelerate the
 commercialisation of indigenous technology, has identified 16 projects
 that are commercially viable in the fields of agriculture, health, chemicals
 and pharmaceuticals. In 1996-97, I provided Rs. 30 crore to the Technology
 Development Fund. I propose to increase the allocation in 1997-98 to Rs.
 70 crore.
 43. Tomorrow’s technology is based on today’s science. I am concerned
that there is declining interest in the learning of sciences in schools and colleges.
I hold the view that an MBA – even if he is from Harvard – is not a patch on a
scientist. On the occasion of the 50 th anniversary of our independence, we will
launch the “Swarnajayanti” fellowships. Outstanding scientists below the age of 45
will be assisted to attain and sustain world class levels in science. A sum of Rs. 50
crore in the Department of Education’s budget will be used to create a corpus. The
Minister of State for Science and Technology will announce the details of the scheme.
 44. Closer linkages have to be developed between Indian industry and
publicly-funded research laboratories. Hence, I propose to allow government-
promoted societies recognised by the Department of Science and Industrial Research
and notified under the Income Tax Act to invest in the equity of private sector
companies. These institutions will invest not money but their knowledge and know-
how as their equity.

 10
 Information Technology
 45. If there is one science that will dominate the 21 st century, it is
information technology. If there is one industry in which India can emerge as a
world leader, it is information technology. However, for this potential to be realised,
we need a completely new policy for manufacturing and marketing IT products.
The Electronic Hardware Technology Park (EHTP) Scheme, presently in force, gives
limited flexibility. There is an imperative need to increase production volumes and
attract foreign direct investment. Accordingly, it has been decided that EHTP/
EOU/EPZ units in electronic hardware may be permitted to sell one half of the
value of their products, during any 12 month period, in the domestic market and
export the other half. The sale in the domestic market will be on payment of excise
duty equivalent to full custom duty, including additional duty of customs. Details
of the new unified manufacturing scheme will be incorporated in the new EXIM
policy that will be effective from April 1, 1997.
 Companies Act and Direct Taxes Act
 46. Hon’ble Members will recall that I had set up an expert group to draft
a new Companies Bill and another expert committee to prepare a new Direct Taxes
Bill. Both groups have done splendid work and have submitted their reports. Copies
of the reports will be distributed widely. A working draft of each Bill will also be
circulated as soon as it is ready. It is my hope that there will be wide and informed
debate on the two Bills. It is my intention to bring the new Companies Bill before
this House in the monsoon session and the new Direct Taxes Bill in the winter
session.
 Insurance
 47. The CMP accords high priority to infrastructure. The India Infrastructure
Report has been published and it now remains for us to implement the report. The
critical need is funds, and that too long-term funds. That is why the CMP said,
“There is a strong link between infrastructure development and the financial sectors
reforms. Infrastructure needs long-term finances.” Hon’ble Members are fully aware
that long-term funds are in the Pension and Insurance sectors.
 48. Our foremost companies in the insurance sector are LIC and GIC.
After a long interval of time, LIC and GIC have been given the full complement of
Board members. We have also decided to grant substantial autonomy to LIC and
GIC, including the power to make non-scheduled, non-consortium investments, to
determine the terms and conditions of service of their employees and agents, to
make regulations and some other powers. LIC and GIC will be further strengthened
in due course.
 49. Under the present laws, pension funds are, by an archaic defintion,
included in the business of life insurance. However, it is self-evident that pension
and insurance are two different benefits and two different businesses. While life
insurance is the monopoly of LIC, several pension funds have been rightly exempted
and allowed to operate independently. In 1995, at the instance of my distinguished
predecessor, UTI floated the UTI Retirement Benefit Plan. It has attracted about
80,000 subscribers. I propose to allow UTI to expand the above plan into a full-
fledged pension fund. UTI has made a request to government in this regard; LIC
has no objection; and hence it is appropriate to amend the laws.

 11
 51. Similarly, the penetration of health insurance cover in our country is
distressingly low. Just about 20 lakh Indians have some kind of health cover. The
Jan Arogya scheme, launched barely six months ago, has already attracted 4 lakh
policyholders. Clearly, there is a demand for health insurance products. GIC has
frankly admitted that its Mediclaim policy has not been successful and that it
would like to promote joint ventures in this line of business. GIC is also confident
of facing competition in the health insurance business. Accordingly, I propose to
move necessary amendments to enable GIC to float joint ventures and also to allow
entry of selected Indian players in the health insurance sector.
 52. What I have outlined is a very modest opening of one segment of the
insurance sector. LIC will continue to enjoy a monopoly in the life insurance business
and GIC will continue to enjoy a monopoly in the non-life, non-health insurance
business. I would also like to make it clear that only a few Indian companies, that
is Indian-controlled and with majority Indian ownership, will be permitted to enter
the health insurance business. Comprehensive regulation will be made and enforced
by the Insurance Regulatory Authority (IRA) for all the service providers in the
insurance industry. They will also have to meet the prudential, investment and
social norms laid down by the IRA.
 Phasing out of Ad Hocs
 53. Hon’ble Members will recall that in my last Budget speech I had
promised to present concrete proposals in this Budget to phase out the system of
ad hoc treasury bills by 1997-98. I am glad to announce that the government and
the RBI have worked out the specific measures in this regard.
 54. The system of ad hoc treasury bills to finance the budget deficit will be
discontinued with effect from April 1, 1997. A scheme of ways and means advances
(WMA) by the RBI to the Central government is being introduced to accommodate
temporary mismatches in the government’s receipts and payments. This will not be
a permanent source of financing the government’s deficit. Besides ways and means
advances, RBI’s support will be available for the government’s borrowings
programme. Details of the scheme are being separately announced by the RBI.
 55. What I am effecting today is a bold and radical change which will
strengthen fiscal discipline and provide greater autonomy to RBI in the conduct of
the monetary policy. With the discontinuance of ad hoc treasury bills and tap
treasury bills, and the introduction of ways and means advances, the concept of
Budget deficit, as currently defined, will lose its relevance either as an indicator of
short term requirement of funds by the government or the extent of monetisation.
Therefore, it is proposed to discontinue the practice of showing the ‘Budget deficit’;
instead Gross Fiscal Deficit (GFD) would become the key indicator of deficit. The
extent of RBI support to the Central government’s borrowing programme will be
shown as “Monetised deficit” in the Budget documents.
 Indexed Bonds
 56. Several countries have used variety of indexed bonds to provide investors
an effective hedge against inflation and to enhance the credibility of anti-inflationary
policies followed by the government. I believe the time is ripe for India to introduce
a capital indexed bond where the repayment of the principal amounts will be indexed
to inflation.

 12
 New Devolution Formula
 57. I have already placed in the House a discussion paper on the
recommendations of the Tenth Finance Commission (TFC) on the formula to be
adopted for devolution of resources from the Centre to the States. The views of the
States have been received. The Standing Committee of the Inter-State Council has
also considered the matter. Based on these consultations, I propose to accept the
recommendations of the TFC to form a single, divisible pool of taxes to be shared
between the Centre and the States. To begin with, we shall adopt the proportion of
29% recommended by the TFC. This will be an improvement on the present share
of the States. However, we are willing to discuss the matter further when we bring
the Constitution Amendment Bill to give effect to the decision. We reaffirm our
belief that the polity of India requires a strong Centre and strong States and if, I
may add, strong local bodies.
 Revised Estimates for 1996-97
 58. I shall now briefly go over the Revised Estimates Revised Estimates for
1996-97.
 59. The Budget Estimates for 1996-97 had placed the total expenditure at
Rs. 2,04,660 crore. This is now expected to come down to Rs. 2,02,298 crore. This
is the net effect of a decrease of Rs. 2,571 crore in non-Plan expenditure and an
increase of Rs. 209 crore in the Plan expenditure.
 60. Non-Plan expenditure in the current year is placed at Rs. 1,47,404
crore. This represents a decrease of Rs. 2,571 crore over the Budget Estimates
basically on account of saving of Rs. 3,000 crore in the provision made for the
likely impact of the recommendations of the Fifth Pay Commission. On the other
hand, we have not got Rs. 4,500 crore of the anticipated receipts from disinvestment.
Despite these constraints, I made an additional provision of Rs. 1,700 crore for
Defence during the year. On balance, we have managed our receipts and expenditure
within the Budget.
 61. My greatest satisfaction is on the Plan side. We saved a considerable
amount of Plan expenditure of the Central government. It was, therefore, possible
for me to provide an additional Rs. 2,500 crore to the States as Additional Central
Assistance for externally-aided projects. I also provided Rs. 663 crore to Jammu
and Kashmir during the year. As a result, total Plan expenditure has increased by
Rs. 209 crore. If I have robbed Peter, the Central government, it is only to pay Paul,
the States.
 62. In October, 1996, the Prime Minister announced a package of initiatives
for the North-East, including adequate funding for on-going projects, which will
require over Rs. 6,000 crore. Government will allocate funds for these projects in
the Ninth Plan. The Numaligarh Refinery is making good progress. I have provided
Rs 100 crore for the project in the RE 1996-97 and over the next two years adequate
funds will be found to ensure its completion on schedule.
 63. The overall gross tax revenue which was estimated at Rs. 1,32,145
crore in the Budget estimates will be marginally higher by Rs. 174 crore, although
the net tax revenue of the Centre would be marginally less by about Rs. 100 crore
from the Budget estimate of Rs. 97,310 crore.

 13
 64. Taking into account the Revised Estimates of revenues and expenditure,
the Revenue Deficit has come down from the Budget estimate of 2.5% of GDP to
2.3% of the GDP. There is no change in the Budget estimate of the fiscal deficit
which would remain at 5% of the GDP. I am profoundly sorry to disappoint my
well-meaning critics.
 65. What will we do without our critics? As Saint Tiruvalluvar said:
 “Idipparai Illatha Emara Mannan Keduppar Ilanum Kedum”
 (Behold the King who reposeth not on those who can rebuke him/He will perish
even when he hath no enemies.)
 Budget Estimates for 1997-98
 66. I now turn to Budget Estimates for 1997-98.
 67. The total expenditure is estimated at Rs. 2,32,481 crore of which Rs.
62,852 crore has been provided as budget support for Central, States and UT Plans
and the balance Rs. 1,69,629 crore is for non-Plan expenditure. Hon’ble Members
will be pleased to note that the increase in budget support for the Plan will be Rs.
7,958 crore over RE 1996-97, which is the largest increase ever.
 68. Budgetary support to the Central Plan is being concentrated on rural
development, emplyment and poverty alleviation programmes and in the human
resource development sectors. For 1997-98, the outlay for the Ministry of Rural
Areas and Employment is being increased to Rs. 9,096 crore, an increase of Rs.
1,271 crore over the RE for 1996-97. In 1997-98, Jawahar Rozgar Yojana is estimated
to generate about 520 million mandays of employment. About 90,000 habitations
will be provided with safe drinking water during 1997-98 under the Accelerated
Rural Water Supply Scheme.
 69. The outlay for the Social Services is being substantially enhanced from
Rs. 11,785 crore is RE 1996-97 to Rs. Rs. 15,707 crore in BE 1997-98. Significant
increases are under Urban Development (Rs. 775 crore), General Education (Rs.
1,189 crore), Technical Education (Rs. 132 crore), Family Welfare (Rs. 282 crore)
and Water Supply and Sanitation (Rs. 312 crore).
 70. The Science and Technology sector is being provided Rs. 1,870 crore
as against Rs. 1,584 crore is RE 1996-97.
 71. The Maulana Azad Education Foundation is being given Rs. 40 crore.
The National Minorities Development and Finance Corporation is being provided
Rs. 41 crore.
 72. Rs 96 crore is being allocated to the National SC and ST Finance and
Development Corporation. For the welfare of the handicapped, I am providing Rs.
90 crore and for the National Handicapped ST Finance and Development Corporation
I am giving Rs. 28 crore.
 73. The total non-Plan expenditure in 1997-98 is estimated to be Rs.
1,69,629 crore. The interest payments are estimated to be Rs. 68,000 crore.
 74. Fertiliser subsidy on indigenous fertilsers is being enhanced to Rs.
5,240 crore in 1997-98 from Rs. 4,743 crore in 1996-97. In addition, subsidy on
imported fertilsers is being increased to Rs. 1,950 crore in 1997-98, as against Rs.

 14
1,350 crore in. The subsidy on sale of decontrolled fertilsers is being enhanced to
Rs. 2,000 crore in 1997-98 from Rs. 1,674 crore.
 75. An amount of Rs. 7,500 crore is being earmarked for foodgrains and
sugar subsidies in 1997-98 representing an increase of Rs. 1,434 crore over RE
1996-97. When the dual card system under the Targeted PDS takes effect throughout
the country, if more funds are required, I shall provide the same. I may not wear
my heart on my sleeve, but my heart is in the right place.
 76. I would like to make a special mention of the outlay for Defence. Rs.
35,620 crore is being provided which included Rs. 3,620 crore for implementing
the recommendations of the Fifth Pay Commission. In the past, revenue expenditure
of the Defence Services had been routinely underprovided. This year, I have requested
the Ministry of Defence to fully provide for the revenue expenditure. On the capital
account, for the present, I am providing Rs. 8,907 crore which is Rs. 402 crore
more than RE 1996-97, with a clear promise – and I make that solemn undertaking
here – that any additional requirement of the Defence for capital expenditure wiil
be adequately provided for during the course of the year. Mr. Speaker, Sir, my head
is also in the right place.
 77. A provision of Rs. 4,205 crore is being made for implementing the
recommendations of the Fifth Pay Commission for employees other than Defence
and Railway personnel for whom separate provision have been made in this Budget
and in the Railway Budget. The recommendations of the Pay Commission are being
processed expeditiously according to established procedure.
 78. The non-Plan provision for assistance to public sector units has been
on the increase. In 1996-97, we approved revival packages for Bharat Yantra Nigam,
Bharat Bhari Udyog Nigam, Hindustan Paper Corporation, Scooters India, HEC
and Bharat Refractories. For 1997-98, I am providing Rs. 1,107 crore as non-Plan
loans, and I expect that we will approve more restructuring proposals during the
course of the next year.
 Revenue Receipts
 79. I now turn to revenue receipts.
 80. Gross tax revenues at the existing rates of taxation are estimated at
Rs. 1,53,347 crore. After providing Rs. 40,254 crore as the States’ share of taxes,
the Centre’s net tax revenue will be Rs. 1,13,094 crore. Non-tax revenues have also
shown healthy buoyancy. The receipts under the head are expected to be Rs.
39,749 crore in 1997-98. I have taken credit for Rs. 3,681 crore as license fee from
private operators of cellular and basic telecom services.
 81. The net revenue receipts for the Centre, including non-tax receipts, are
expected to increase from Rs. 1,30,783 crore in Re 1996-97 to Rs. 1,52,843 crore
in 1997-98.
 82. In the area of capital receipts, market borrowings are placed at Rs.
34,425 crore. Net external assistance will be Rs. 2,435 crore. I am also taking
credit for receipts from disinvestment of equity in public sector enterprises of Rs.
4,800 crore. Total receipts at the existing rates of taxation are estimated at Rs.
2,31,876 crore.

 15
 83. I shall come to the gross fiscal deficit in Part B of my speech.


