 SPEECH OF SHRA T.T. KRISHNAMACHARI MINISTER OF FINANCE
 INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1964-65
 Mr. Speaker, Sir,
 I crave leave of the House to present the Budget for the year 1964-65.
 In presenting the Budget of the Central Government for the year ahead, it is
customary to start with a review of economic conditions in the year that is drawing to
a close and to assess the policies and trends in progress so as to provide a backdrop
for the Budget for the year to come. But my task in this respect is lightened by the fact
that the year has witnessed a considerable reappraisal and reassessment of policies
and performance, as well as a reaffirmation of the basic social values we seek to
promote through all our endeavours. Honourable Members would recall that I had
made before them a statement on the economic situation only a few weeks ago in
December last. The Economic Survey which in the past used to be presented to
Parliament along with the Budget papers has also been placed on the Table of the
House on this occasion a few days earlier. I shall, therefore, confine myself to those
aspects of the economic situation and perspective which are relevant to the proposals
which I shall be placing before the House in the latter part of my statement today.
 2. By and large, the budgetary outturn for the current year bears testimony
to our determination to strengthen our defences without slackening our developmental
efforts or without resorting to unbridled deficit financing. The revised estimates for
1963-64 are presented in detail in a separate section of the Explanatory Memorandum
which outlines the variations between the budget and the revised estimates in the
same detail in which they were traditionally explained. Accordingly, 1 do not propose
now to dwell at length on the budgetary position for the current year. But it is noteworthy
that the overall deficit in the budget which was originally estimated at Rs.181 crores
is now placed at Rs.135 crores. The improvement of Rs.46 crores in the overall gap
has taken place despite the net increase of Rs.94 crores in loans and advances to
States and of Rs.27 crores in loans and advances to other parties. The major
improvement in revenue is on account of Corporation Tax and Taxes on income,
which together show an increase of Rs.70 crores, but this would be partly offset by an
increase of Rs.21 crores in the States’ share of income-tax. Customs and Union Excise
Duties also show an improvement of nearly Rs.35 crores.
 3. It is a matter for particular satisfaction that collections under Small Savings
which amounted to Rs.73 crores in 1962-63 are now expected to amount to Rs.115
crores in 1963-64. Other miscellaneous Debt heads are also expected to show an
improvement of Rs.31 crores, but this will be offset by the decline in Emergency
Risks insurance receipts and Compulsory Deposits.

 1

 4. A part of the improvement in the budgetary position is also explained by
the saving or perhaps shortfall in expenditure of Rs.27 crores under Revenue and
Rs.64 crores under Capital other than Loans and Advances. Of the saying under
Revenue, Rs.16 crores occur under Defence and the balance under Civil heads. The
major shortfalls in Capital expenditure are in respect of Defence, Rs.43 crores;
Hindustan Steel, Rs.19 crores; Atomic Energy, Rs.11 crores; and food purchases, Rs.14
crores. On the other hand, Capital requirements of Railways would show an increase
of Rs.19 crores.
 5. Turning to the economic situation, the most disturbing feature is the rise
in the price level. While the increase in wholesale prices of the order of 8 per cent
over the first three years of the current plan period cannot be considered large by any
standards, and particularly against the background of the sizable step-up in outlays
under defence and development, the fact that the general index of wholesale prices
rose by as much as 7.2 per cent between March 1963 and January 1964 is certainly a
cause for great concern. Government have already taken several steps to afford relief
to the weaker sections of the community. We have, however, in the coming year to
apply new measures of discipline, fiscal and others, to arrest this unhealthy trend.
 6. Essentially, the rising trend in prices is explained by the inadequate rate
of growth in agriculture. After increasing by 1.2 per cent in 1961-62, agricultural
production declined by 3.3 per cent next year. Crop prospects for the current agricultural
season, Which seemed somewhat better to begin with have been adversely affected by
the recent severe winter conditions in some parts of the country. The recent increases
in the prices of edible Items have been causing Government a great deal of concern.
The problem is being examined at the highest level and may I add with the greatest
care. My colleague, the Minister of Food and Agriculture has had meetings with Chief
Ministers and other concerned Ministers in the States and a programme of concerted
action is being evolved. While attention has to be given to the regulation of distribution
and prices, the main emphasis will have to be on higher production. The experience of
intensive agricultural production in certain selected areas through what are known as
‘package programmes’ has led us to decide that we should concentrate our efforts in
about 80 selected districts, or roughly about 1500 development blocks, which hold out
promises of quickest results. The impact of these and other measures which the State
Governments are taking should I believe be felt on the next Kharif crops. Government
also propose to create a special organisation for this purpose in the Food and Agriculture
Ministry to be headed by an officer, who has considerable experience in this field. It
is also proposed to build up later on, similar specialised agencies for the stimulation
of some of the cash crops as well.
 7. On the industrial front production trends have been more satisfactory, the
increase being 10 per cent over the first nine months of the current year compared
with 8.5 percent in the corresponding period of the previous year. Honourable Members
are aware that a number of steps have been taken to stimulate industrial production
 2

and a measure of acceleration in the rate of growth over the coming year should now
be possible. Even so, it is clear that the preservation of a reasonable degree of stability
in the months to come will call for a reduction in the volume of deficit financing in the
coming year.
 8. In this connection, the overall rate of monetary expansion in the economy
will also call for a careful watching. During 1963, money supply with the public
increased by Rs.430 crores or 13.8 per cent as compared to an increase of 9.9 per cent
in 1962 and 6.1 per cent in 1961. Government indebtedness to the banking system has
been a major factor in monetary expansion in recent years; but bank credit to the
private sector has also shown a brisk increase during the current busy season. While
the Reserve Bank pursues a fairly liberal policy to help production and while the
availability of credit to the farmer is being improved by the Agricultural Credit
Department of the Reserve Bank, a close watch has to be kept on the situation so as
to ensure that credit creation is kept within reasonable limits and does not encourage
speculation or hoarding.
 9. Externally, the current year has witnessed a welcome increase in export
earnings and a comparatively satisfactory position in regard to foreign exchange
reserves. On present indications, export receipts during 1963-64 should exceed Rs.760
crores and thus show an Improvement of at least 7 per cent over the corresponding
receipts in 1962-63. Partly as a result of better export performance and partly in view
of greater utilisation of external assistance, particularly of the non-project type, our
foreign exchange reserves are likely to show a slight improvement over the current
year as against a decline of Rs.2.21 crores in 1962-63 and Rs.6.30 crores in 1961-62.
In addition, we have reduced our indebtedness to the International Monetary Fund by
$ 50 million during this year as against an increase in such indebtedness of $ 25
million in 1962-63 and $ 122.5 million in 1961-62. While it is gratifying that the
combined burden of defence and development has not put an intolerable strain on our
balance of payments as a result both of our own efforts and the generosity of our
friends, our reserves are still far too low for us to be complacent. We cannot afford to
relax our efforts to strengthen them.
 10. In the ultimate analysis, the three problems of prices, growth and balance
of payments on which I have focussed my remarks so far are inter-related and we
cannot solve any one of them without the fullest attention to the other two. Indeed, it
is only to the extent that all these problems are tackled within the framework of an
integrated policy, in regard to incomes, wages and investments that we can hope to
ensure that the necessary investment potential is made available for the development
of the economy.
 11. Treating the problem of growth as an isolated factor and promoting growth
by stepping up investment from the sources available within and without the country,
without a corresponding policy for the incomes generated in the process, would not
 3

only stimulate inflation but also other evils besides. Similarly, a price policy which
disregards the dynamics of growth, or the impact on investment decisions, cannot but
be self-defeating in the same way as a price policy which is not coordinated with a
corresponding policy in regard to wages. It is now generally agreed, for example, that
trying to keep agricultural prices too low for producers may defeat the objective of
raising agricultural production. If this is the case, one cannot, at the same time, try to
keep agricultural prices low for all consumers, or adopt a wage policy in which most
wage-earners are compensated for the increase in: agricultural prices. Nor can one
succeed in raising resources for defence or for that matter development by taxation if
each such effort leads to price increases which are passed on all along the line. These
are, I think, a few lessons which have emerged from our experience, in the recent past,
which deserve to be borne in mind in framing budgetary and other policies for the
period ahead.
 12. As far as investment policy is concerned, there is little doubt that, at the
present stage of the economy, it is just as important to make the most efficient use of
the investments already completed as it is to step up further the tempo of investment.
Often, in the race for making the new starts, sufficient attention is not given to the
fullest exploitation of the facilities already created. We cannot at the same time afford
to postpone making new investments in development; nor can financial difficulties be
allowed to slow down the completion of schemes which have already been taken up.
From both these considerations; it follows that the, level of investment next year in
the public as well as the private, sector must be stepped up as much as possible.
 13. In a certain sense Sir the broad pattern of investment that we must undertake
in India is self-evident; and it is easy enough to agree that we need to expand investment
in irrigation works, fertiliser plants, power and transport programmes, or indeed basic
and heavy industries which have a vital bearing on the future growth potential of the
economy. But broad generalisations of this nature are of little help at this stage when
the most important questions to decide are in regard to the choice of the specific
projects and programmes in each of these fields which promise the greatest benefit in
relation to the cost they entail. Our present arrangements for the choice of specific
projects and programmes after a detailed examination of the technical and economic
aspects of practical alternatives leave much to be desired; and it is my intention to
strengthen this aspect of the work of my Ministry during the months ahead.
 14. Apart from this question of the size and pattern of investment, there is
need for speedier execution of projects and of earning better returns from the
investments that are, being made. Many of the public sector projects are lagging
behind the schedule of their construction, and what is more disappointing is that their
contribution to our resources is nowhere near the Plan estimates. It is of the utmost
importance for our economy that enterprises in the public sector should not only make
profits, but should make good profits. By that I mean that they should give a good

 4

dividend to the Exchequer and yet be able to build up reserves to finance their own
future expansion. I know that some people think that public sector enterprises should
work on no profits or on low profits. Such an approach is wholly unsound in any
society, and more so one in which the State seeks to own or control the major sectors
in production. When the State does no more than build schools, hospitals and roads,
it need not look to direct returns on its investments. But when the State begins to
provide power and transport, when It begins to own steel plants, fertiliser plants and
machine-building plants, It must make sizable profits out of them, build reserves,
amortise loans and provide adequately 5, for depreciation of assets and their
replacement, so that the public sector can expand without adding unduly to the tax
burden. This is reinforced by the fact that the products and services provided by the
public sector are absorbed by the private sector which is not inhibited from making
adequate profits. To the future growth of the public sector in India, a major contribution
has to be made by the return on investments already made in the public sector.
 15. It is equally important for our development that the private sector has the
resources to expand in the fields assigned to it. In my statement last December, I had
referred to some of the steps to be taken towards this end. Since then, the House has
enacted legislation for the establishment of the Unit Trust which has already come
into being. The House will also be considering the Bill for the establishment of a
Development Bank which is intended to make an additional contribution to the resources
for the development of our industrial economy.important and significant as these
measures are, basically the resources for development are generated not entirely by
the setting up of institutions such as these, but in the community through the savings
that are made. One of the prime objectives of our economic and fiscal policy, therefore,
must be to generate savings both in the hands of individuals and in the hands of
corporate bodies.
 16. One of the weaknesses in our economy has been that a high proportion of
the community’s saving is being diverted towards industries of low priority, towards
quick speculative gains through purchase and sale of urban housing and the hoarding
of commodities in short supply in a manner which tends to push up their prices. Some
of these trends need rectification through fiscal measures to which I shall turn later. It
isimportant that these savings should be canalised into the industries to which we
attach the highest priority.
 17. Part of the distortion, however, comes about through some of the short
term and, If I might say so, short sighted devices to deal with the price situation. By
Imposing statutory controls on the prices of certain basic commodities, we often succeed
in discouraging investment in the very industries which produce those items. This
tends to perpetuate the shortage and to aggravate rather than relieve the pressure on
prices. Often controls of this type do not result in the commodities in question being
available to the consumer at lower prices, What happens is that the high prices which

 5

the consumer continues to pay do not benefit the producer, but go into the pockets of
others. And because these prices are not legally recognised, the Exchequer also is
deprived of its dues. In curbing profiteering, fiscal devices can be used much more
effectively than controls which lead to abuses. Reliance on price controls is only
appropriate where it is possible to exercise effective check on distribution and
consumption as well; in other words, where there cap be some form of rationing.
 18. While conceding the need to provide private industry with resources for
the development entrusted to it in our planning scheme, I should like to say a word
about the equallyimportant point that we must net, in the process, allow concentration
of economic power and growth of monopolies. The question which we have to consider
is how we are to achieve this objective consistently with our concern to see that
genuine and desirable development is not stifled. For a proper formulation of our
policies and attitudes in this respect, Government feel that there is need for an Impartial
and objective enquiry so as to bring the relevant data out in the open. It is, therefore,
proposed to set up under the Commission of Enquiries Act a Commission to enquire
into monopolies and the concentration of economic power in the Indian economy.
While we must await its report before undertaking any legislation or setting up any
kind of a statutory body to deal with the monopolistic practices, I should like to draw
attention to some aspects of this problem.
 19. There are basically three essential ingredients in any industrial or economic
set up. They are: ownership, control and management. When discussing the question
of monopolies, it isimportant to distinguish between these three elements and to have
a clear appreciation of their relative roles. It is popularly believed that the ownership
of industries in the private sector is concentrated in a few hands. This is only partially
true. No doubt in a country like ours with such widespread poverty, a very large
section of the population does not own any part of the industry, trade or banking
which is carried on in the country. It is also true that the wealthier a person is, the
larger would be his ownership of stocks and shares. At the same time, what is not
often realised is that even the biggest industrial plants in the country today belong, in
terms of ownership, much more to the people at large than to their original founders
with whose names they are popularly associated. The Life insurance Corporation is
itself a significant shareholder of many of the larger industrial and banking units in
the private sector. Investment by private individuals, many of them of modest means,
has also been increasing. Among the further measures through which Government
proposes to disperse the ownership of industry in the private sector, I would refer to
the Unit Trust, our efforts to Promote cooperative ownership, as we have done with a
fair degree of success in the case of new sugar factories, and the measures which we
adopt, and to which I shall turn later, to reduce the inequalities of wealth.
 20. It is really disturbing that despite diffused ownership, control is
concentrated in a relatively few people. We have recently taken some major steps to

 6

weaken this stranglehold. The changes in the Banking Companies’ Act and the
amendments to the Companies’ Act have paved the ground for the State to have strategic
control over the private sector in order to ensure that the investor in industry gets a
square deal and that anti-social activities are curbed and controlled.
 21. It is net, of course, our intention to interfere in the detailed running of an
enterprise in the private sector. Indeed, the running of the enterprise is not a matter of
control, but of management. Management is a professional and technical job and the
skills necessary for that have to be encouraged and rewarded not only in the private
sector, but also in the public sector. One of the weaknesses in the public sector today
is the lack of adequate managerial personnel. The last thing which we should do is to
weaken the management. It is control which really is the vital element. In the society
which we hope to establish on an enduring basis, the private sector, in the sphere
assigned to It, will have the opportunity to grow, to attract individual savings, and to
develop managerial skills, subject to the overall discipline of the State, to prevent
monopolistic exploitation and the pursuit of methods which do not help the growth of
the economy. Our fiscal policies should give encouragement and support to larger
investment in priority industries, to better and more efficient management by those
who have the necessary talent and to a weakening of the devices, such as managing
agencies and Improvised selling agencies, through which dynastic domination of private
industry is perpetuated.
 22. The efforts which we make through our fiscal and other devices to,
encourage savings, to invest them soundly and to run our plants efficiently and profitably
in the public interest, will for many years to come, need to be sustained by the inflow
of foreign exchange in the form of external capital which serves the dual purpose of
filling the gap between domestic savings and levels of investment and our export
earnings and Import requirements. Much of our foreign assistance has been coming in
the shape of credits and grants from friendly Countries, as well as from international
institutions, particularly the World Bank which takes an active role in organising the
aid effort through annual meetings of the Consortium. We have since the Emergency,
been also helped by external aid to strengthen our defence effort. In addition, supplies
of agricultural products, specially wheat and cotton and rice under the PL 480
programme of the United States have made a major contribution in meeting food and
other material shortages in the country. We owe a debt of gratitude to these friendly
countries and institutions, which I must, on this occasion, publicly acknowledge.
 23. While for some years to come we must rely on continued external
assistance, it is important that we should at the same time, devote increasing attention
to the objective of reducing our requirements of such aid. We can do so by reducing
the level of our imports. But there is a point beyond which restrictions on imports,
whether fiscal or administrative, begin to do more harm than good, result in idle
capacity in industry and slower rate of growth and lead to higher prices with a
 7

consequent fall in export earnings, which may well exceed the saving in foreign
exchange effected by a cut in imports. Our primary emphasis in import saving has to
be not on additional measures of restriction, but on tuning our investment policies to
give the maximum support to our balance of payments. Secondly, we must do everything
possible to increase our export earnings, though here again, we have to be careful not
to spend too much foreign exchange on the devices we use to help our exports. Finally,
we must make full use of private capital sources in the world outside to augment the
external aid we receive.
 24. Quite apart from the credits which we receive em from Governments, we
could raise funds from the banking system and capital markets of the world. We have,
however, to remember that our external debts are already at a high level. For the Third
Plan, we had a repayment liability of approximately Rs.575 crores, including principal
and interest, and the repayment liability for the Fourth Plan is already in excess of
Rs.825 crores. In these circumstances, we should specially welcome foreign investment
in the shape of equity capital which not only brings with It technical know-how and
managerial skills, but has the special advantage of not adding to the heavy and growing
burden of debt repayment. To attract private investment in appropriate fields, we have
to offer some incentives and I shall deal with those which pertain to the fiscal field a
little later.
 25. I shall now turn to the budget provisions for the coming year. At the
existing level of taxation, I have budgeted for a total revenue of Rs.2095 crores and
expenditure of Rs.2041 crores, leading to a surplus of Rs.54 crores on Revenue account.
 26. As compared to the revised estimates for the current year, the Revenue
receipts next year would be more by Rs.181 crores. The four principal heads of Revenue
account for an improvement of Rs.92 crores, while interest receipts are expected to go
up by another Rs.32 crores. Following the change in the procedure for the release of
assistance under PL 480 on an advance basis, the grants for approved projects are now
expected to exceed the current year is provision by Rs.76 crores. But this would be
covered by a corresponding transfer to the Special Development Fund for which the
expenditure estimates take a debit. These improvements, however, will be partly offset
by a drop of Rs.12 crores under Emergency Risks insurance receipts and Rs.4 crores
under the surplus profits of Reserve Bank accruing to Government.
 27. I am, as 1 said before providing for Revenue expenditure of Rs.2041
crores next year, of which Rs.718 crores will be for Defence Services and Rs.1323
crores for Civil purposes. The defence requirements debitable to Revenue next year
show an increase of Rs.25 crores over the revised estimates of Rs.693 crores for the
current year, while Civil Expenditure shows an increase of Rs.191 crores. The growing
volume and cost of public borrowings, mainly for development, account for an increase
of Rs.36 crores under Debt charges. A lump provision of Rs.10 crores has been made
on account of the increase in dearness allowance sanctioned recently with retrospective
 8

effect from 1st July 1963. Miscellaneous Social and Developmental Services in the
fourth year of the Plan are expected to cost Rs.21 crores more whereas grants to States
for both Plan and non-Plan purposes would exceed the current year is Revised estimates
by Rs.53 crores. The self-balancing Items of grants under PL 480 deposits and
Emergency Risks insurance Receipts, to which I have just referred, together account
for a net increase of Rs.64 crores. The States’ share of Union Excise Duties would
also show an increase of Rs.5 crores.
 28. In putting forth these estimates, I have tried to be as liberal as I could in
estimating receipts and as strict as possible in providing funds for expenditure, taking
into account the fact that actuals have, in the past, shown large increase in receipts
and savings in expenditure. At the same time, I must add that If for purposes of our
development or for that matter, defence, we find it necessary I shall not hesitate to
come to the House for Supplementary Grants.
 29. Excluding the adjustment for the transfer of loan assistance from U.S.A.
which is notionally treated as Capital Expenditure, Capital outlay next year is estimated
at Rs.796 crores representing an increase of Rs.34 crores ever the current year is
Revised. The Defence Capital requirements next year at Rs.136 crores show an increase
of Rs.20 crores over the current year.
 30. The repayment of debt, both internal and external, will be of the order of
Rs.259 crores next year. Loans to parties other than the State Governments at Rs.254
crores will be higher by Rs.64 crores. So far as States are concerned, the revised
estimates include Rs.101 crores as their share in the market borrowing in the current
year which was a combined effort for the States and the Centre. It has since been
decided, after consultation with the State Governments, to resume the practice of
separate market operations by the Central and State Governments for the next year.
Excluding the States’ share of combined market loan, loans to States next year at
Rs.606 crores show an increase of Rs.81 crores over the current revised estimates.
 31. I must, at this juncture, digress to say that the financial position of most
of the States has been causing me a good deal of concern. The total amount due to the
Centre by the States at the end of the current financial year will be of the order of
Rs.3,000 crores. In addition, the States’ liability on account of market loans at present
amounts to Rs.656 crores. Both in terms of loans from the Centre and market borrowings
the States have been receiving more than what was originally contemplated in the
Plan. Their share of Central taxes and duties has also been increasing. Yet most of
them are constantly facing ways and means difficulties of a somewhat disturbing
nature. The whole position will require careful review in the context of the Fourth
Five-Year Plan. While we should aim at giving the States a good deal of flexibility in
allocating their own resources, so far as Central assistance is concerned we must also
ensure that a major portion of It is related to the Capital expenditure on identifiable
projects which are economically sound and can be expected to generate the resources

 9

for the repayment of their liabilities. Other devices will also have to be thought of. As
a first step, it is proposed to set up the Fourth Finance Commission at the beginning
of the next financial year so that its report becomes available before we finalise the
shape and size of the Fourth Plan.
 32. Provision has been included in the budget next year for a total expenditure
of Rs.1516 crores for implementing the Plan of which Rs.253 crores will be on Revenue
account and the balance of Rs.1263 crores as Capital outlay, including Loans. In
addition, Railways are expected to provide Rs.46 crores, Hindustan Steel Rs.25 crores
and other public sector enterprises Rs.44 crores from their own resources. These
estimates include Rs.559 crores as assistance to the States of which Rs.122 crores
would be on Revenue account and Rs.437 crores would be in the Capital budget. The
States are expected to find Rs.353 crores from their own resources. Thus, the total
State Plans next year would be of the order of Rs.912 crores as compared to the
current year’s budgeted outlay of Rs.750 crores. With the Central outlay of Rs.957
crores, contribution from public sector enterprises of Rs.115 crores and State Plans of
Rs.912 crores, the total Plan outlay in the fourth year of the Plan would amount to
Rs.1984 crores, showing a step-up of Rs.333 crores over the budgeted outlay of Rs.1651
crores for the current year. Much of this additional outlay is to strengthen the agricultural
sector, as well as to meet the cost of Plan projects which are nearing completion.
 33. Larger outlays on Defence are also a matter of painful necessity to us.
The Defence Budget in 1964-65, taking Revenue and Capital together, is somewhat
lower than the budget estimate for the current year, but shows an increase of Rs.46
crores over the revised estimates. No one in this House will grudge this increase
though we may all regret it. For the current year’s budget, the House was pleased to
vote the necessary funds without asking for the usual details which, from the security
angle, it would not have been prudent to disclose. We are now in a position to give a
fuller picture and the budget papers contain the usual details. The point 1 would
emphasise is that our defence effort depends largely on building up our production
base and the steps we have taken to strengthen the economy are also those that will
strengthen our defences. In recognition of this fact, even the outlays to be voted under
the Ministry of Defence have a substantial provision for investment in productive
enterprises.
 34. For meeting the increased cost of development in the coming year and in
the years thereafter together with our obligations to meet the needs of defence, it
would be necessary to take all possible steps for mobilising resources. Promotion of
savings would have to form a cardinal part of such mobilisation. I had indicated that
we are likely to end the year with record collections of Rs.115 crores through Small
Sayings. I am assuming for the coming year net collections of Rs.125 crores. I hope
this figure will be exceeded. Even at this rate we are not likely to reach the target of
Rs.600 crores for the Plan. We have, therefore, to make special efforts to step up the

 10

level of savings in the community as a whole. To this end our policy in regard to
incomes, wages and consumption has to be reoriented. Savings, and as a consequence,
investment can only be generated by a margin between consumption and incomes or
wages. While we cannot afford to neglect our efforts to improve the lot of low income
groups, such efforts, I feel, should be directed more towards measures of social security
than towards an increase in their expendable income. This is not the time for me to go
into details but 1 will content myself by saying that Government intend to devote
special attention to the task of mobilisation of savings and social security measures in
the coming year. I am making suitable administrative arrangements for this purpose.
 35. I may now summarise the overall budgetary position. Capital outlay will
amount to Rs.796 crores, loans to States and other parties Rs.860 crores and debt
repayments Rs.259 crores, leading to a total disbursement of Rs.1,915 crores. These
are expected to be met to the extent of Rs.54 crores from Revenue surplus, Rs.997
crores from internal and external borrowings, Rs.285 crores from repayment of loans,
Rs.125 crores from small savings and Rs.278 crores from miscellaneous debt and
deposit heads. These would leave a total uncovered budgetary gap of Rs.176 crores at
the existing level of taxation.


