 SPEECH OF SHRI MORARJI R.DESAI, MINISTER OF FINANCE
 INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1963-64.


 Sir,
 I rise to present the Budget for the year 1963-64. For a number of years now the
annual Budget has been framed primarily with reference to our plans for development.
The year that is now drawing to a close has witnessed the emergence of yet another
challenge to us as a nation; and much of what 1 have to say this evening will relate
necessarily to the new situation that confronts us in regard to the defence of our
country.
 2. I shall, therefore, not dwell at any length upon economic trends and
developments in the current year. These have been set out fairly fully in the Economic
Survey which is being circulated separately. I would, however, like to touch upon
those aspects of the current economic situation which have a bearing on our tasks
during the coming year.
 3. Honourable Members would recall that shortages in the basic sectors of
the economy, particularly in regard to the supply of power, transport, coal and steel,
were a source of concern during the first year of the current Plan period. It was in
the light of these shortages that the Budget for 1962-63 had made provision for a
sizable increase in Plan outlay. During the course of the year, programmes of
development in these vital sectors were reviewed carefully so as to ensure accelerated
and coordinated development of the economy as a whole and I am happy to say that
there has been a significant improvement in the availability of coal, power, steel and
transport over the past year. This trend will be strengthened further in the months to
come as programmes now in hand begin to get completed. Some of our major public
sector projects have made further progress. The Bhakra Dam has been completed
and substantial additions to power capacity have been made from the Rihand and
Hirakud projects. The public sector steel plants are now producing to near capacity.
Industrial production as a whole has continued to grow and during the first half of
the year, It was 7.2 per cent higher than in the corresponding part of 1961-62. We
shall have to improve upon this performance in the coming years, particularly in
view of the demands of the present Emergency and to this end, both the public and
the private sectors must play their part.
 4. Agricultural supplies during the year were not uniformly satisfactory. As
the 1961-62 crop was no higher than the crop in the preceding year, prices, particularly
of foodgrains, increased between March and August 1962 and there was an increase
 1

of 6.1 per cent in the general index of wholesale prices during this period. To keep
prices in check a number of steps were taken. Monetary policy was geared to an
orderly increase in the cost of credit as well as to a restraint on speculative tendencies.
With a view to stimulate agricultural production and to give the agriculturist the
confidence that If :he stepped up production, he would not lose by a fall in prices,
minimum prices for wheat and procurement prices for rice were announced, the ceiling
price for cotton was further raised and measures to sustain jute prices at remunerative
levels have been strengthened. It is gratifying to note that the general index of wholesale
prices for the month of January, 1963 averaged Th as against 127.5 at the beginning
of the Third Five-Year Plan. Foodgrains output during the current season is expected
to be better than the previous one. Even so, we shall have to redouble our efforts to
increase agricultural production if the rate of growth of the economy in to be accelerated
and the general stability of prices, which has on the whole been a welcome feature of
the past two years, is to be preserved. In these efforts, measures to increase the
production of rice and of Items such as cotton and oil-seeds deserve special emphasis
on account of theirimportant bearing on the coat of living and the balance of payments.
 5. The one sector of our economy which has been the cause of the greatest
concern to me throughout the year is our external payments position. The summer of
1962 witnessed a sharp deterioration in our foreign exchange reserves. The foreign
assets of the Reserve Bank, which were already drawn upon heavily during the earlier
years, declined further from Rs.129.7 crores at the end of March, 1962 to Rs.97 crores
by the end of June. We had, therefore, to make further cuts in import quotas already
announced and impose severe restrictions on foreign travel as well as to enter into a
stand-by arrangement with the International Monetary Fund. Improvement in export
earnings and larger reimbursements under aid have staved off further pressure on
reserves over the past few months and on February 15, 1963, the foreign assets of the
Reserve Bank stood at Rs.105 crores. But a level of reserves only a little above the
legal minimum at the height of the favourable export season cannot be contemplated
with equanimity.
 6. Turning to the budgetary and fiscal developments during the current year,
the revenue originally estimated at Rs.1386.93 crores will, according to latent
indications, go up to just over Rs.1500 crores. Of the improvement of over Rs.119
crores in revenue, Rs.73.70 crores occurs under the three principal heads. Customs
revenue win go up by about Rs.24 crores due mainly to larger Imports of machinery,
which we welcome as they reflect an acceleration of our developmental effort, and of
kerosene, diesel and other oils, which clearly are a cause for concern in our foreign
exchange situation. The increase of Rs.31.67 crores under Union Excise Duties is due
to the progressive increase in the production and clearances of a number of excisable
commodities, notably sugar. Iron and steel products and motor spirit. Better yield
from taxes paid in advance and larger collections at source on dividends, interest and
salaries account for an improvement of Rs.18.20 crores under Corporation and income
 2

taxes. Of the rest of the improvement, the major increases are under Debt Services
due mainly to larger recovery from States and under the three self-balancing Items of
receipts from iron and steel surcharge, P.L.480 Grants and Emergency Risk insurance,
which are transferred to the respective funds by provision in the expenditure estimates.
 7. Expenditure for the current year is also expected to go up from Rs.1381.65
crores to Rs.1522.31 crores. The biggest element in this increase is the step-up in the
expenditure on Defence Services, to which this House gave its unqualified approval
when within weeks of the wanton aggression on our borders, it voted supplementary
grants of Rs.95 crores. The revenue expenditure on Defence is now expected to go up
to Rs.451.81 crores, which is Rs.10 8.44 crores higher than the original estimate.
 8. Civil expenditure, on the other hand, shows a relatively small increase of
Rs.32.22 crores over the original estimate. The principal item responsible for this
increase is the funding of receipts relating to the three self-balancing items, to which
I have just referred and which account for an increase of Rs.28.5 crores. With higher
revenue from Union Excise Duties, the States’ share will go up by Rs.10.55 crores.
The policing of border areas will require an additional provision of Rs.6.25 crores.
These increases will be partly counter-balanced by savings of Rs.1.87 crores under
Debt Services and Rs.11.48 crores under the group-head ‘Social and Developmental
Services’ excluding the provision for the transfer of surcharge on iron and steel which
is one of the self-balancing items just mentioned.
 9. The net effect of these changes is to increase the revenue deficit from the
nominal figure of Rs.72 lakhs originally estimated to Rs.22.06 crores. Considering
that for Defence alone we have had to provide Rs.108 crores more than the original
estimate, the resultant position of the ‘revenue budget for the year cannot be said to be
unsatisfactory.
 10. Turning to the Capital Budget, excluding the adjustment for the transfer
of assistance from the United States to the Special Development Fund, which is
notionally treated as capital expenditure, the current year’s budget provided Rs.592
crores for capital outlay. The corresponding figure now estimated is Rs.593 crores.
The increase of a crore of rupees is the net result of a large number of variations. The
Defence capital outlay will go up by Rs.20 crores. A better tempo of execution will
necessitate additional provision of Rs.21 crores for Railways, Hindustan Steel and the
Heavy Engineering Corporation. These increases will, however, be offset by savings
under numerous heads of which I would mention Rs.14 crores for food purchases,
Rs.5 crores for Oil and Natural Gas Commission, Rs.4 crores each for the National
Coal Development Corporation, Farrakka Barrage and Border Roads and Rs.2 crores
for the Fertillser Corporation.
 11. In addition to direct capital outlay just mentioned, the original estimates
provided Rs.453 crores for loans to States and Rs.136 crores for loans to other parties
 3

including local bodies, Port Trusts and public sector enterprises. These are now
estimated to go up to Rs.523 crores and Rs.147 crores respectively.
 12. The bulk of the excess of Rs.70 crores under loans to States is attributable
to the grant of loans to seven State Governments to clear their over-drafts with the
Reserve Bank. Despite the grant of substantial assistance from the Centre for financing
their Plan and now-Plan outlays and the larger share of Central taxes and grants/
accruing to them as a result of the Third. Finance Commissions’ award, some of the
States had overdrawn their account with the Reserve Bank. While agreeing to clear
their overdrafts, I had to stipulate that the States must impose tight financial discipline,
raise additional resources and keep their expenditure within their means. I trust the
States will ensure that a similar situation is not allowed to arise in future.
 13. Our borrowing programme shows a shortfall of Rs.20 crores in Small
Savings which will be more than made up by the sale of National Defence Bonds
introduced after the Emergency. The receipts from P.L.480 deposits and foreign loans
will be lower than expected by Rs.30 crores and Rs.78 crores respectively. As mentioned
earlier, the revenue deficit will go up by Rs.21 crores and loans to States and other
parties will be more by Rs.81 crores. The deterioration of Rs.210 crores will be offset
to the extent of Rs.60 crores by Improvement under several heads, of which Rs.47
crores is attributable to the receipts on account of the National Defence Fund and Rs.9
crores to the Emergency Risk insurance.
 14. The net effect of all these variations will be to increase the overall, deficit
from the original estimate of Rs.90 crores to Rs.240 crores. It is not unlikely that the
actual budgetary deficit for the current year would be somewhat smaller than what I
have just indicated. But the fact remains that despite the improvement in revenues and
the sizable contributions to the National Defence Fund and the National Defence
Bonds after the onset of the Emergency, the overall deficit would show a large increase
over what was anticipated. The shortfall under Small Savings and the larger ways and
means assistance to some of the States reflecting their financial weakness are matters
of particular concern. Honourable Members, I am sure, would agree that although
prices have remained reasonably stable over the past two years, there is little room for
complacency in regard to the size of the deficit we might safely incur over the years
to come.
 15. The paramount consideration in framing the Budget for 1963-64, as I
mentioned at the outset, is the need to build up the defence potential of the nation. The
House would be glad to know that I propose to provide Rs.867 crores for Defence
next year as against the Revised estimate of Rs.505 crores and the Budget estimate of
Rs.376 crores in the current, year. At the same time, I propose to provide Rs.1226
crores for Plan outlay of the Centre, including assistance to the States, as against
Rs.1107 crores provided in the Budget for the current year. It has become in recent
months a rather oft-repeated statement that defence and development are vitally inter-
 4

linked. But this is one of those truths which do not become any the less true Mr being
repeated often. The investments which we have already, set in train and for which
foreign assistance is already assured must be brought to fruitful completion as early as
possible. And this consideration alone would require a significant increase in Plan
outlay next year. The Emergency has created new needs. It would not be prudent,
therefore, to provide for the paramount claims of defence by sacrificing the claims of
development. Taking defence and development, together, therefore, the Budget provision
for the next year would show an increase of Rs.610 crores over the Budget estimates
this year.
 16. At this stage I should like to refer to certain changes introduced in the
form of the Demands for Grants with the approval of the Estimates Committee. With
the growth in our Plan outlays and the decision to give separate details of both Plan
and non-Plan expenditure, the size of the Demands for Grants has grown enormously
in recent years. This has had the effect of making the Demand unwieldy and difficult
to follow. It has now been agreed with the Estimates Committee that Parts III and IV
of the Demands which give details, according to different circles of account, and
which are intended primarily for the authorities controlling the Grants, may be replaced
by two new schedules. These schedules give details of Plan provision and the staff
employed under different categories. In addition, notes on Demands for Grants also
include a statement of important items of non-Plan expenditure. Arrangements will
also be made for placing in the Parliament Library copies of Parts III and IV of the
Demands which will continue to be printed for Departmental use. These arrangements
should make for the presentation of the Demands in a more concise form without
taking away any part of the, important information which is of interest to Parliament.
 17. I would also like to mention the changes made in the presentation of
Demands for Defence Services. Hitherto the provision for the three Services with the
supporting details had been given separately. Following the practice adopted in the
last War, I have decided to combine the Demands for the three Services into a single
Demand but without the usual details, The combined Demand gives the provision for
the three Services at the current year’s level with a lump provision for meeting the
cost of various emergency measures. The House, I am sure, will appreciate the need
for these changes which have been made in the interest of national security.
 18. For the coming year, at the existing level of taxation, I am budgeting for
a total revenue of Rs.1585.73 crores and expenditure of Rs.1852.40 crores resulting in
a deficit of Rs.266.67 crores on Revenue account.
 19. The Revenue estimates next year show an improvement of Rs.85.48 crores
over the current year’s Revised. Union Excises are expected to go up by Rs.30.27
crores while the revenue from income and Corporation taxes would show a further
Improvement of Rs.15 crores. Interest receipts account for an increase of Rs.40.56
crores of which Rs.18 crores will be from Hindustan Steel, Rs.10 crores from the
 5

State Governments and Rs.8.43 crores from Railways. The receipts from Emergency
Risk insurance of goods and factories, if continued at present rates, would show an
increase of Rs.27 crores. We have also decided that in view of higher costs of
Government borrowings, the Railways and the Posts and Telegraphs Department should
give, with effect from the coming year, a higher dividend to the General Revenues and
accordingly the rate will be raised from 41/4 per cent to 41/2 per cent. This will give an
additional Rs.4.43 crores. These improvements however, will on present rates be partly
offset by decreases of Rs.10.45 crores under Customs Revenue due to the Imposition
of further restrictions on imports, shortfalls of Rs.11.70 crores under iron and steel
surcharge and Rs.9 crores under P. L.480 Grants and increase of Rs.2.68 crores in the
States’ share of income-tax.
 20. Of the total Revenue expenditure of Rs.1852.40 crores next year, Rs.708.51
crores will be for Defence Services and Rs.1143.89 crores under Civil Heads. As
compared with the revised estimates, the Civil expenditure next year shows an increase
of Rs.73.39 crores. The expanding volume and cost of public borrowings account for
an increase of Rs.34.21 crores under Debt Services. Administrative Services next year
will cost Rs.11.89 crores more due mainly to additional expenditure on border police.
The increase in their share of Union Excises and larger grants to States explain mainly
the increase of Rs.10.54 crores under Contributions and Miscellaneous Adjustments.
While transfers on account of Emergency Risk insurance would be more by Rs.27
crores, those in respect of iron and steel surcharge and P. L.480 Grants would be less
by Rs.11.7 crores and Rs.9 crores respectively. The remaining heads under Social and
Developmental Services win show an increase of Rs.9.84 crores, whereas absence of
provision for payment to the Reserve Bank for the withdrawal of Escudo currency
will result in a saying of Rs.9.14 crores.
 21. The provision for Capital Outlay next year is estimated at Rs.827 crores,
representing an increase of Rs.234 crores over the current year’s revised requirements.
Defence Capital Outlay is responsible for an increase of Rs.106 crores. Of the other
major increases, mention may be made of Rs.35 crores for Hindustan Steel, Rs.30
crores on account of net expenditure on food purchases including internal procurement,
Rs.15 crores for Railways, Rs.13 crores for Posts and Telegraphs, Rs.15 crores for
National Highways, Rs.8 crores each for Atomic Energy and Oil and Natural Gas
Commission and Rs.5 crores for Drugs Corporation.
 22. The Budget next year provides Rs.541 crores for loans to States including
Rs.100 crores as their share of market borrowings, following the decision taken by the
National Development Council to raise combined loans for the Central and State
Governments next year. The loans to other parties are estimated at Rs.175 crores. An
item of special interest which I would mention here is that during the rest of the Plan
period, a sum of Rs.9 crores is to be earmarked for giving financial assistance to
students of recognised merit and specially favourable terms will be offered to those
who enter the teaching profession.
 6

 23. As 1 mentioned earlier, provision has been included in the Budget next
year for a total expenditure of Rs.1226 crores for implementing the Plan, of which
Rs.196 crores will be on Revenue account and the balance of Rs.1030 crores as Capital
outlay including Loans. In addition, Railways are expected to provide Rs.38 crores
and Hindustan Steel and other public sector enterprises Rs.37 crores from their own
resources. These estimates include Rs.400 crores as assistance to the States of which
Rs.94 crores would be on Revenue account and Rs.306 crores in the Capital Budget.
The States are expected to find Rs.350 crores from their own funds. Thus the total
State Plan outlay next year would amount to Rs.750 crores, which, with the Central
outlay of Rs.90 1 crores, would give a total Plan outlay of Rs.1651 crores in the Third
year of the Plan as compared with the current year’s budgeted Plan outlay of Rs.1465
crores. The provision for Plan outlay next year would thus amount to 22 per cent of
the total outlay of Rs.7500 crores for the Plan period as a whole, as against 19.5 per
cent for the current year and actual expenditure of a little over 15 per cent in the First
year of the Plan.
 24. For the next year, the estimates take a credit of Rs.400 crores from market
borrowings including Rs.100 crores to be raised on behalf of the State Governments.
The receipts from Small Savings have been assumed at Rs.105 crores. Credit has also
been taken for Rs.462 crores from fresh foreign loans and Rs.90 crores from P. L.480
deposits including Rs.30 crores to be transferred from the moneys formerly deposited
with the State Bank of India.
 25. I may now summarise the overall budgetary position next year. At the
existing level of taxation and expenditure, there will be a Revenue deficit of Rs.267
crores. Capital outlay will amount to Rs.827 crores, loans to States and other parties,
Rs.716 crores, and debt repayments, Rs.231 crores. The total disbursement of Rs.2041
crores is expected to be met to the extent of Rs.967 crores from internal and external
borrowings, Rs.248 crores from repayment of loans, Rs.90 crores from investment of
P. L.480 Funds and Rs.282 crores from Miscellaneous Debt and Deposit heads, leaving
an overall budgetary gap of Rs.454 crores.
 26. Honourable Members, I am sure, would not expect me to leave this large
gap of Rs.454 crores entirely uncovered. But, before 1 come to my proposals as to the
manner and extent to which this gap should be covered, I would like to recall a point
which 1 had made when introducing my last Budget. I had emphasised that in a
planned economy taxation policy serves not only the objective of raising resources for
the Exchequer but it is also an instrument of economic policy to achieve the wider
objectives of promoting the rate of growth of the economy and of correcting Imbalances
between different sectors of It. I should therefore like at this juncture to re-emphasise
some of the points calling for special attention which emerge out of the brief review
of the economic trends and developments which 1 have already given.

 7

 27. First and foremost, there is the need to increase production and accelerate
the pace of development. The growing claims of defence and development cannot be
met except on the basis of an expanding volume of production. By far the greater part
of the responsibility for increasing production rests with the private sector; and when
I refer to the private sector, I am referring not only to organised industry and labour,
but also to the millions of our peasants and artisans. We shall have to make every
possible effort to ensure that the productive potential of our agriculture and industry,
both big and small, is harnessed to the fullest extent to the task in hand. At the same
time, there should be clear recognition of the fact that given the magnitude of the task
that confronts us, we shall succeed only to the extent that we are prepared to put forth
an effort of a kind that transcends ordinary incentives and rewards. The public sector
also must make its contribution, more particularly by a speedy and efficient execution
of all projects and programmes already in hand, so that the fruits of investment we are
making begin to be available with the shortest possible delay. In most cases, external
assistance is available to cover the foreign exchange requirements of the projects in
progress. It would be false economy to allow fiscal or financial considerations to
stand in the way of the quick implementation of these projects, whether they are in the
public or in the private sector.
 28. The second thing which must be evident from what I have said earlier is
the seriousness of our foreign exchange position. To the pressures on our balance of
payments arising from the requirements of development and a growing burden of
servicing foreign debt, we must now add the even more urgent requirements of Defence.
Honourable Members would, I am sure, like me to take this opportunity of expressing
the gratitude of this country to friendly foreign countries, particularly the United States
and Britain, who rushed to our assistance with military equipment and supplies in the
hour of need. But the fact that we are being helped liberally with external resources to
finance our development and our defence is a reason for us not to slacken but to
redouble our efforts to mobilise our own resources to the utmost. Not only, therefore,
has the budget to provide the rupee resources we need, but it must also help in securing
a better balance on external account. We have put the most stringent restrictions on
imports already and a stage has been reached when further restrictions would have a
serious detrimental effect both on production and on exports. There to little room left
now for drawing further upon our already depleted reserves. Greater availability of
assistance for financing imports of materials and components has, therefore, been
particularly helpful to us in the present stage of our development when our own
industries can deliver increasing amounts of capital goods, with better availability of
imported raw materials and components. While It is only proper that we should continue
to seek rational changes in the nature and scale of external assistance, we, on our part,
have to strain every nerve to increase our export earnings and to keep our requirements
of civilian consumption with in the strictest limits of austerity. As Honourable Members
are aware, we have launched on a new policy in the country to plug an important
 8

source of leakage in our foreign exchange earnings. Drastic and far-reaching as this
policy is, it represents only the kind of action that we must be prepared to take on a
number of fronts if we are to achieve a position of viability in our external accounts.
 29. To the already stringent measures for restricting the quantum of imports,
we must now, I feel, add more decisive restraints of a fiscal nature. It is essential for
the successful operation of direct controls that they should be reinforced by appropriate
budgetary measures and there is a strong case for diverting to the Exchequer a larger
share of the profits made by importers, whether on the direct sale of the items imported,
or on the sale of products using imported materials and equipment. Both Customs
Duties and Excise Duties have a part to play in this regard.
 30. Somewhat similar considerations apply to export promotion. We have not
only to remove such handicaps as our export industries face as a result of fiscal levies
which we impose to meet our domestic requirements, but also to provide positive
financial incentives to our nascent export industries to enable them to secure a fair
share in foreign markets. The principle of protecting domestic industry in developing
countries by import duties has long been accepted as a sound economic doctrine
supported by the so-called “infant” industry argument. What is true of domestic
industries competing with foreign industries in home markets is equally true of domestic
export industries in developing countries that have to compete with well-established
exports of more advanced countries. In logic, as indeed in practical necessity or
international ethics, there would seem to be no difference between import duties to
protect domestic industry and financial incentives to export industries seeking to
compete on a more equal footing in overseas markets.
 31. I have drawn attention to some of the basic economic considerations that
we must bear in mind even as we face the formidable task of providing for a sharp and
sizable increase in Defence outlay next year. The overall gap of Rs.454 crores arises
almost entirely from the increase in Defence outlay. Earlier in the year, it was my
hope and expectation that having raised taxation in the first two years of the Plan to
meet nearly 80 per cent of the target for the Third Five-Year Plan, it would be possible
to provide for all essential requirements this year without any significant additional
taxation. Bit the new threat on our borders has made it necessary for me to come to
the House with proposals for a much higher order of taxation. We cannot allow the
present cessation of active fighting on our frontiers to lull us into a sense of
complacency. No mater how great the effort, the resources that are needed to defend
the honour and integrity of the motherland must be raised. And as we prepare for this
challenge, we cannot plunge the country into the chaos of inflation by unbridled
deficit financing.
 32. I am deeply conscious of the fact that the scale of taxation which I am
about to propose is going to impose an unprecedented burden. It has been my endeavour
to ensure that the additional burden is distributed as equitably as possible among the
 9

different sections of the community. Honourable Members would appreciate that our
requirements are so massive that we cannot possibly meet them without expecting a
contribution even from the poorer sections of the community. The enormity of the
challenge which confronts us demands nothing less than a measure of sacrifice from
every citizen. It is all the more imperative, therefore, that considerations of equity and
social justice, which we have accepted as an integral part of our way of life, should
receive even more earnest attention now than ever before.
 33. With all the effort at additional taxation I am about to propose, the need
for voluntary restraint on the part of the people would also remain as great as ever.
The response of all sections of the people in the present Emergency has been truly
magnificent. And I have every confidence that the same spirit of willing cooperation
and self-restraint will be sustained while the security of the nation is in danger.
 34. By far the largest expenditure in the country is incurred by Governments
at the Centre and the States. There cannot be any question that economy and efficiency
in public expenditure are the very heart of the matter in mobilizing resources. We
have taken a number of steps at the Centre to effect economies in several directions.
But essentially, the task of achieving the utmost economy in public expenditure is not
merely a question of cutting or reducing some items of expenditure or of laying down
this or that rule of procedure. What we need is more performance with less expenditure
of resources in every sphere of public activity; and what such economy through
efficiency requires is an attitude of mind-a spirit of vigilance and responsibility-on the
part of all those who are entrusted with the expenditure of the people’s money, be they
engineers, army officers, contractors, workers, civil servants or indeed Ministers. Here
again, the task is one which is for all of us to perform incessantly and not just that
which anyone of us can lay down once and for all,


