 SPEECH OF PROF. MADHU DANDAVATE MINISTER OF FINANCE
 INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1990-91


Sir,
 1. I deem it a great privilege to have the opportunity to present the first
Budget of the new Government.
 2. Over a hundred days ago winds of political change swept the country. The
new Government, which secured a massive vote of confidence of this Honourable
House, transcending political affiliations, made a tryst with the nation to respect and
implement the mandate it received from the people.
 3. Let me, at the outset, deal with the economic situation that we inherited
from the previous Government. I do so not in a spirit of acrimony but with a view to
revealing to the House the ground realities. The Central Government’s budgetary deficit
was Rs.13,790 crores as on Ist December, 1989, a level nearly double the deficit
projected for the whole year in the 1989-90 budget. Wholesale prices had risen by 6.6
per cent since the beginning of the financial year. The balance of payment was under
strain and foreign exchange reserves (excluding gold and SDRs) were down to around
Rs.5000 crores. Stocks of foodgrains had fallen to 11 million tonnes.
 4. On a broader scale, the Economic Survey which was placed on the Table
of the House only a few days ago deals with the current economic situation. I will not
go into details but only highlight a few key points.
 5. There has been some slowing down of growth in 1989-90. GDP is expected
to rise by 4 to 4.5 per cent, industrial output by about 6 per cent and agricultural
output by 1 per cent or so on the peak level reached in the previous year.
 6. The price rise this year affects several commodity groups and the pressure
of inflation is clearly linked to the fiscal imbalance. The budget deficit and money
supply growth have been running well above target. The Revised Estimates for 1989-
90, which I will present a little later, indicate that the budget deficit is expected to be
substantially higher than Rs.7337 crores projected in the budget estimates for 1989-
90. The growth rate of aggregate monetary resources was 16.5 per cent from the
beginning of the financial year to 23rd February, 1990.
 7. As regards the trade performance this year, exports have grown at the rate
of 38 per cent and imports at 21 per cent in rupee terms in the first nine months of the
year. But the pressure on reserves continues as the improvement on trade account is
not sufficient to counter-balance the increase in debt-service obligations.
 1

 8. I have drawn attention to these features in order to highlight the constraints
within which the new Government has to look for ways of fulfilling its mandate.
 9. The first task of the new Government was to contain the rise in prices. A
Cabinet Committee on Prices was formed and effective steps were taken to increase
the supply of essential commodities, break the inflationary psychology and contain
inflation. The price situation, however, remains a matter for concern and the
management of inflation is one of the priority areas for this Government.
 10. Adequate stocks of foodgrains are essential for maintaining price stability
and our economic security. The Government has given a high priority to stepping up
procurement efforts and to rebuilding of stocks. As a result, the procurement of rice
has touched a new high of about 10 million tonnes already. Foodgrains stocks in the
central pool have been augmented and stand at 11.67 million tonnes at the beginning
of February compared to 8.34 million tonnes at the same time last year. Special attention
has been given to increasing supplies of essential commodities and streamlining the
Public Distribution System. Market intervention operations are being undertaken to
stabilise open market prices of some sensitive commodities.
 11. Another major problem before the country is the strain on our balance of
payments position. In the last few years, large trade and current account deficits have
been financed through depletion of foreign exchange reserves and growing recourse
to foreign borrowings. To combat the pressures on the balance of payments and to
ensure a viable situation over the Eighth Plan period, exports must command the
highest priority. The alternative of higher foreign borrowing to finance our essential
import requirements runs the risk of mortgaging our hard won economic independence.
This is clearly unacceptable. Therefore, the new Import Export Policy 1990-93, to be
announced on 1.4.1990, will accord top priority to exports and will give special
encouragement for exports which earn high net foreign exchange. The priority for
exports will also be reflected in our industrial policy and later I will outline some
fiscal measures to promote export production.
 12. Our import bill for bulk items is increasing rapidly. The oil consumption,
for example, has been rising at the rate of around 8 per cent in the recent past. There
has been a huge outflow of foreign exchange on this account. India’s foreign debt has
been doubled in the last five years. This has added to our vulnerability. The trend has
to be reversed. I am convinced that our people will make any sacrifice and meet any
challenge in order to preserve our economic independence and spirit of self-reliance.
We are ready to go through a period of austerity and hardship in order to avoid excessive
foreign borrowings.
 13. The fiscal imbalance is the root cause of the twin problems of inflation
and the difficult balance of payments position. One of the targets of the Seventh Five
Year Plan which was over achieved was deficit financing. While the projected deficit
in the 7th Plan period was Rs.14000 crores, in reality it was more than double.
 2

 14. The management of the deficit will require the containment of expenditure
growth. 1 can assure the House that we will spare no effort to reduce the burden of
administrative expenditure. * But the restraint of expenditure also requires careful
consideration of other areas of public spending which involve implicit or explicit
subsidies. We have to ask ourselves whether these subsidies are really reaching the
people they are meant to serve or whether there is a better way of providing the same
benefit.
 15. On the revenue side, the real issue is of tax compliance. Tax evasion is
rampant. This generates black money and has other serious adverse effects on the
economy, such as fuelling inflation and conspicuous consumption. Black money is
also generated by shortages, artificially pegged prices and detailed physical controls.
The “leakages” from public expenditure programmes also cause serious distortions in
the economic and social structure of our society.
 16. We will launch a sustained and multi-pronged drive against proliferation
of black money which is a social sin and an economic evil. To improve tax compliance,
we shall combine reasonable tax rates and simpler tax laws with effective tax
administration and strong deterrents against evasion. The Revenue Department is being
instructed to pay special attention to vulgar display of ill-gotten wealth, particularly
on occasions, such as wedding receptions. We will come down with a heavy hand on
those who give vent to their pomp and money power, by circumventing our laws and
frittering away the scarce resources of the nation. The Economic Intelligence Bureau
is being revamped to coordinate action against tax evaders and black money operators.
The Act on “benarni” transactions will be recast to make it more difficult for economic
offenders to hold wealth in “benami” forms.
 17. Administrative curbs against black money must be backed by economic
measures. We must reduce the scope of discretionary powers which provide sustenance
to black money. Our economic policies will place greater reliance on general, non-
discretionary, fiscal and financial instruments and will reduce the role of ad hoc
discretionary physical controls.
 18. I have also received some suggestions from Honourable Members and
fiscal experts on incentive scheme for “unearthing” of black money and channelling it
into desired directions. The advantage claimed for such schemes is that, instead of
being used for conspicuous consumption or unproductive investment, the unaccounted
money can be diverted to create jobs or to serve some other socially useful purpose.
The disadvantage is that these schemes generally provide for a more concessional tax
treatment of the black money than the rates normally applicable. The different schemes
tried out in the past did not yield much and were open to misuse. Human ingenuity
manifests itself in strange ways. In the past, it found expression in converting the
bearer bonds, issued with the laudable objective of bringing out black money, into
alternate currency that exchanged hands at a premium. Thus the instrument to render
 3

black money white was itself used with vengeance to reconvert white money into
black!
 19. Nevertheless, in the present situation, when our needs are large and
resources are tight, there is perhaps a case for introducing a time-bound scheme which
would permit undeclared incomes and hidden wealth to be used for one or more social
purposes, such as, slum clearance, building of houses for lower and middle income
groups, and setting up of specified agro-based industries in rural/backward areas.
Subject to certain conditions, the source of monies declared under this scheme need
not be questioned. There could be a suitable flat rate of tax on such income.
 20. The Government would like to have a thorough debate in the Parliament
before introducing a scheme of this type. I would very much welcome the views of the
Honourable Members during the budget debate. In the light of these discussions the
Government will take the final decision.
 21. Domestic trade in gold is regulated under the Gold Control Act which
was introduced in 1963 with the broad objective of curbing the demand for gold. The
Act has been largely ineffective. It has also caused hardship and harassment to small
goldsmiths. There is not much point in continuing with such an ineffective legislation.
The Government, therefore, proposes to abolish the Gold Control Act. This step would
benefit many artisans and small goldsmiths all over the country. At the same time, we
will use the Customs Act more vigorously to prevent smuggling of gold.
 22. Let me now turn to some issues of long-term development.
 23. In the traditional growth pattern, while the poor at the grass root level
suffered in silence without much benefit of growth trickling down to them, the affluent
at the. top lived in splendid isolation and monopolised most of the gains of economic
growth. The new Government rejects this trickle down theory of development. Instead,
it would work for growth with equity ensured through employment oriented planning
in which the decentralised institutions, of the four pillars state, aptly described by Dr.
Ram Manohar Lohia as the ‘Choukhamba Raj’ will play a pivotal role.
 24. Our first priority is employment In the eighties, our economy grew at
around 5 per cent or more. But, according to a recent report of the National Sample
Survey the number of persons who are chronically unemployed increased from 8
million in 1983 to 12 million in 1987-88. In addition, there are a vast number who are
underemployed and whose earnings from work fall well short of a decent minimum.
We believe that “every citizen has the right to productive and gainful work in order to
live meaningfully and with dignity”. We would like to introduce an Employment
Guarantee Scheme. However, the cost of doing so in all parts of the country are huge,
and we do not have the necessary resources at this juncture. Nevertheless, it is proposed
to make a beginning on an Employment Guarantee Scheme for the drought prone
areas and areas with an acute problem of rural unemployment The allocation for the
 4

employment schemes of the Department of Rural Development will be supplemented,
to the extent feasible, during the course of the year.
 25. Faster growth of agriculture must be an important part of this strategy. We
have achieved impressive growth in yields in the areas of good irrigation but yields
remain very low in large harts of the country which are rainfed or semi-arid. Our
strategy for agricultural development must focus on increasing output in these areas
through greater investment in irrigation, land development, and soil and moisture
conservation. These investments will increase production. They will also generate
greater absorption of labour in agriculture. Parallel to this effort, regions of high
productivity should aim at diversification of agriculture and development of agro-
based processing industries. This will provide the economic linkages between the
rural economy and growing markets in urban areas, as well as potential markets abroad.
 26. The country had adopted an Industrial Policy Resolution in 1956, which
through the years, has governed our broad strategy for industrial development. It is
surprising that there is no similar Agricultural Policy Resolution. Ibis Government
will remove this lacuna. We will lay the basic foundations of agricultural development
through the adoption of an Agricultural Policy Resolution. This will represent our
national commitment in respect of a sector which is the hub of our economy. We
invite all sections of the people to interact with the Government on the formulation of
this Policy Resolution.
 27. We are committed to ensuring that 50 per cent of the investible resources
are deployed for the development of agriculture and rural development We have made
a beginning, in this year’s Central Plan in which the share of the rural sector in
budgetary support for the Central Plan will go up from 44 per cent in 1989-90 to 49
per cent in 1990-91. In addition, on the non-Plan side we are providing Rs.1000 crores
for debt relief, and Rs.4000 crores for the fertilizer subsidy, which also go to benefit
rural areas.
 28. The steps for the inclusion of the land reforms legislation in the Ninth
Schedule of the Constitution have already been initiated and the necessary constitutional
amendment will be introduced. Simultaneously, various measures for the restructuring
of the land relations are being worked out and we hope to initiate steps in this direction
after due consultation with the State Governments.
 29. Over the years, poor farmers, artisans and weavers have accumulated debt
which they are unable to repay. They have been caught up in a vicious circle of
indebtedness and low incomes which keeps them in perennial poverty. In order to
relieve our farmers from the burden of debt, an assurance was given in the National
Front’s manifesto that relief will be provided to farmers with loans upto Rs.10,000 as
on 2nd October, 1989. I am glad to inform the House that we are now ‘ ready with the
scheme of implementation of debt relief to fulfil the promise, and redeem the pledge
given to the kisans and artisans.
 5

 30. It is proposed to introduce a scheme for providing debt relief which will
have the following features. The relief will be available to borrowers who have taken
loans upto Rs.10,000 from public sector banks and Regional Rural Banks. The relief
will cover all overdues as on 2nd October, 1989 including short-term as well as term
loans. There will be no limit on the size of the borrower’s land holdings. However,
wilful defaulters, who in the past did not repay loans despite their capacity to do so,
will be excluded. The Central Government will compensate the public sector banks
and Regional Rural Banks suitably for the debts which are thus written off. Many of
those who filed insolvency petitions and had taken loans below Rs.10,000 which were
overdue as of 2nd October, 1989 will also be covered under the scheme.
 31. The State Governments may also wish to introduce a scheme on the same
lines in respect of cooperative banks within their purview. Subject to the constraint of
resources, the Central Government will consider suggestions for helping State
Governments in implementing a debt relief scheme on the same pattern in respect of
cooperative credit institutions under their control.
 32. I consider the debt relief measure as a positive step which will enable our
farmers, artisans and weavers to increase their productivity. It is at the same time
necessary to ensure that there is no erosion of the credibility of the banking system.
Once the past over-dues are cleared, it is reasonable to expect that loans taken for
current operations will be serviced promptly. The Scheme should contribute to better
agricultural recoveries and better identification of wilful defaulters, who do not deserve
any sympathy. Banks are being asked to set up a system of maintaining a proper credit
history of their borrowers covered under the Scheme. The Government would also
like to make it clear that the Scheme will not be extended nor will it be repeated.
 33. The Government proposes to introduce changes in the formula for
computing costs of production of agricultural crops for price fixation so as to take full
account of all costs. In particular the formula will take into account
 (1) valuation of labour (including family labour) on the basis of statutory
 minimum wage, or actual wage, whichever is higher,
 (2) the remuneration for the managerial and entrepreneurial efforts of the
 farmer,
 (3) adjustment of procurement/support prices for the escalation in input costs
 between the announcement of the prices and the arrival of the crop in the
 market.
 The new formula will be reflected in the procurement support prices to be
announced for the next kharif season. As procurement prices are revised in line with
costs, the revision of issue prices is also unavoidable. In future, the Government will
announce revision in procurement and issue prices at the same time even though these
may take effect on different dates.
 6

 34. The threat to our environment can no more be ignored. It has been estimated
that around 130 million hectares of land is degraded through soil erosion, salinity,
total loss of tree cover, etc. Our forests are under pressure from a variety of sources.
In urban areas, air and water pollution from industry, transport and other sources is
widespread. A healthy environment is part of the quality of life and a productive
environment is the basis for development. Our emphasis on rural development and
decentralisation will allow us to integrate environmental considerations into the design
of development.
 35. Let me now turn to another area of great concern-that of unemployed
youth. All of us who travel in our constituencies have seen the plight of young people
able and willing to work, but unable to find employment. A long-term solution to this
problem has to come from a shift to a more employment-oriented growth strategy. But
as an immediate step we have decided to give a boost to measures which will assist
the youth of this country to acquire the skills that will improve their prospects for
gainful employment. A comprehensive Vocational Training Project has been taken up
covering 28 States and Union Territories. The Project will improve the quality of
craftsmen training, apprenticeship training and advanced training of industrial workers.
We also propose to link training and the provision of credit support for self-employment.
 36. Under the leadership of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar thousands belonging to the
Scheduled Castes had embraced Buddhist religion in 1956 to seek liberation from
caste oppression to which they were subjected for centuries. However, in the eyes of
the orthodoxy the social stigma on the Scheduled Castes was not erased even after
their conversion to Buddhism. It has, therefore, been decided by the Union Government
that all the facilities and privileges that were available to the Scheduled Castes will be
available to them from the Union Government even after their conversion to Buddhism.
 37. A strategy for greater absorption of labour in agriculture has to go hand in
hand with faster growth of industry and balanced development of infrastructure,
specially power and transport. It is self evident that higher investment and faster
growth in incomes in agriculture can be sustained only if industrial production increases
to meet the rising demand for inputs and wage goods in particular. This Government
will give priority to accelerating industrial growth in a competitive and non-monopolistic
environment. The Government will review and simplify the Industrial Licensing Policy
to ensure that licensing does not become an instrument for preventing competition
and perpetuating monopolies.
 38. The Khadi, Village and Small scale sector has a special role to play in any
strategy for employment-oriented industrial development. We will work for the
harmonious development of cottage, small and large industries and give protection
against encroachment of large scale on small scale and small scale against cottage
wherever necessary.
 7

 39. The withdrawal of the 15 per cent Central Investment Subsidy for
Backward Areas has affected the growth of small scale industries. We must take industry
to the people and not people to the industry. We propose to reintroduce a Central
Investment Subsidy for small scale units in rural areas and backward regions.
 40. A major problem faced by small industries is delay in the settlement of
bills by large units. The provision of factoring services in which the task of realisation
of the bill is taken on by an intermediary is one way of mitigating this. The House will
be glad to know that some steps towards this end have already been taken by the
Reserve Bank of India.
 41. The problems of women entrepreneurs in the cottage and small sector are
of particular concern to us. The provisions regarding margin money and seed capital
for women entrepreneurs will be reexamined and liberalised.
 42. There is a single window scheme for grant of working capital along with
term assistance to new projects in the small scale sector by State Financial Corporations.
This arrangement facilitates setting up of small scale units without waiting for
finalisation of working capital limits from banks. The present limits of project cost for
determining eligibility for such composite loans is being raised from Rs.5 lakhs to
Rs.10 lakhs.
 43. Reserve Bank has issued guidelines for provision of credit and
rehabilitation of viable small scale units. These guidelines, are intended to assist the
small scale sector and not create hurdles in its path. Banks are being asked to implement
them faithfully.
 44. The public sector is vital to our country’s development. It has played a
major role in broadening the base for industrial and technological development in this
country. The overall working results for the first six months of this financial year
show a significant improvement in net profit from Rs.694 crores last year to Rs.1103
crores this year. In 1990-91, Central sector enterprises will finance 46 per cent of their
plan investment from internal resources. We are committed to making the public sector
more efficient and result-oriented so that it can generate more surpluses which can be
ploughed back for development.
 45. The health of the public enterprises depends crucially on the commitment
of its employees and their full participation in management. It has been suggested that
one way of securing this is to give workers a share in ownership either through stock
option schemes or sale of shares to workers or to trusts owned by workers. Since the
equity of public enterprises is not quoted in the market, arrangements will have to be
worked out to determine the sale and purchase price of such worker’s shares. I invite
suggestions from Honourable Members on the merits of this idea and how it could be
implemented.
 8

 46. We are also firmly committed to the healthy development of capital
markets, and to strengthen the role of public financial institutions. The institutions
will be given functional autonomy. However they must also be accountable for their
actions. The institutions will not be party to corporate battles and clandestine takeovers.
The government would like to create an atmosphere and a culture where financial
institutions can function objectively without fear or favour.
 47. There has been some concern about the role of financial institutions in
relation to their intervention in the capital market. I have asked these institutions to
frame suitable guidelines so that their actions are not only objective but seen to be so.
Each financial institution is expected to operate in the interest of its depositors and
investors consistent with national priorities. There may be occasions when there is an
abnormal and persistent upward or downward movement in share prices because of
concerted bull or bear pressures. In such situations, the financial institutions will play
a stabilising role in the capital market.
 48. The growth of banking since nationalisation has been phenomenal. The
banking system has been extended to the remotest part of our country. Banks are now
playing a vital role in mobilising peoples’ savings and channelling them into productive
areas. At the time of nationalisation, only 14 per cent of the bank credit was provided
for the priority sector covering sections, such as, agriculture, rural development and
small industries and businesses. Today, this proportion is nearly 45 per cent. This is
the measure of the success of nationalisation.
 49. There is one aspect of banking operations which is of concern to me. This
is the low credit deposit ratio in some regions. A variety of factors determine this
ratio. I have asked the Reserve Bank of India to pay special attention to this problem
and further improve credit delivery in such areas consistent with financial discipline.
 50. Our bank managers and employees are, as a group, the most qualified,
dedicated and hard working. But it is also a fact that the level of public satisfaction
with the banking services is not as high as it should be. Over the years, perhaps some
structural rigidities have crept in. These need to be removed. There is need for greater
competition and greater operational flexibility in respect of banking services. The
banking culture has to be made more responsive to the needs of the public. I am
requesting the Reserve Bank of India to set up a Committee of Bankers, bank employees,
depositors and borrowers to consider these aspects and make recommendations to the
Government.
 51. The previous Government had announced the formation of the Securities
Exchange Board of India (SEBI) in 1987. Three years have passed and the legislation
for giving statutory authority to SEBI has not been introduced. We will ensure that
this is done in this budget session.
 52. Science and technology is the mainspring of development. We are proud
of the capabilities that we have built up in critical areas like agriculture, space research,
 9

atomic energy and defence. We will aim at utilising the talent of our scientists and
engineers towards two basic ends: ,
 - the development of appropriate technologies for agriculture, non-
 conventional and renewable energy and other employment intensive
 activities,
 - the establishment of a strong base of self reliance in critical areas of
 modern technology.
 Public spending on R & D, incentives for the use of indigenous technologies
and policies to guide private research efforts will be oriented towards these objectives.
 53. There is a large community of Indians settled abroad. They have achieved
tremendous success in their chosen professions and occupations. True to the rich
tradition of our ancient culture, their physical location has not weakened the strong
intellectual, philosophical and social links that they have with the country of their
origin. The Government will continue to provide special facilities for them to invest
their savings in this country. The procedures will be simplified so that they can function
with a sense of confidence and in line with declared national policy.
 54. Let me now turn to the Revised Estimates for 1989-90 and the Budget
Estimates for 1990-91.
Revised Estimates for 1989-90
 55. Revised Estimates of Expenditure for the current year show an increase
of Rs.5620 crores over the Budget Estimates. Of this, Rs.4958 crores are on non-Plan
account and Rs.662 crores on Plan account.
 56. Honourable Members are aware of the strains on our security environment
which unfortunately coincide with the strains on our economy. Hence, on the non-
Plan side, Defence Services are being provided additional Rs.1500 crores to meet
their essential requirements and committed expenditure. The provision for fertilizer
subsidy will be Rs.950 brores more, mainly due to larger imports and clearance of
arrear claims. There is an increase of Rs.276 crores in food subsidy, mainly for clearing
arrears due to Food Corporation of India. An additional provision of Rs.468 crores has
been made for export promotion and market development. Interest payments will be
Rs.710 crores higher. The Government is of the view that the amount of compensation
to be paid to the victims of the Bhopal Gas tragedy under Court order is too meagre
for the magnitude of sufferings of these innocent people. The matter is under review
in Court and in the meantime Government have decided to pay interim relief for the
victims for which a provision of Rs.320 crores has been made which, inclusive of
bank interest over a period of 3 years, will amount to Rs.360 crores. The increases are
partly offset by savings in some areas notably in the lump sum provision made for
dearness allowance consequent on transfer of liability on this account to the budget of
the Ministries/Departments.
 10

 57. On the Receipt side, while collection from Corporation Tax and Customs
duties are expected to more or less reach Budget estimates, the receipts from Union
excise duties are estimated to be Rs.599 crores less than the budget. Income-tax
collections, on the other hand, are expected to be more by Rs.755 crores. States’ share
of taxes including the sums payable to States on the basis of collection figures certified
by the C&AG for the earlier years are placed at Rs.13232 crores against Rs.12438
crores at the budget stage, i.e. Rs.794 crores more. The shortfall in net revenue receipts
is expected to be more than off set by larger receipts from small savings, provident
fund collections and special deposits of non-government provident funds, etc.
 58. The overall deficit for the current year is now estimated at Rs.11750
crores against the budget estimate of Rs.7337 crores.
Budget Estimates for 1990-91
 59. The next financial year is the beginning of the Eighth Five Year Plan.
This Government is irrevocably committed to planned economic development, and to
making the plan more meaningful to the people. As a part of the new strategy, in the
next year’s Plan, we have provided more for those programmes and schemes which
benefit the people directly. We have favoured those programmes that create more
jobs, generate self-employment opportunities, improve the living environment in our
villages and strengthen our agriculture. This is the surest route to overcome poverty.
An increase of 31.7 per cent on last year’s budget estimate is being provided for
Agriculture and Allied Services, without taking into account the budget provision of
Rs.1000 crores for the debt relief for farmers, weavers and artisans. The allocation for
anti-poverty programmes, which are spread over different budget heads is being
increased by about 23 per cent over last year’s budget estimate. This includes the
outlay for employment programmes in rural and urban areas which is being increased
by 30 per cent on last year’s budget estimate.
 60. We have a firm commitment to accord highest priority to agriculture and
rural development and our thrust and actions are in conformity with that commitment.
 61. For the Central Plan 1990-91, I propose an outlay of Rs.39,329 crores - an
increase of Rs.4,883 crores or 14.2 per cent over the current year’s outlay. Of this,
Rs.17,344 crores will be provided as budgetary support and the balance of Rs.21,985
crores will be mobilised by the public sector enterprises through their internal resources
as well as borrowings.
 62. For the year 1990-91, an outlay of Rs.905 crores is proposed for the
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation which represents an increase of 17.5 per
cent over the budget estimates for the current year. In addition, I am also proposing an
outlay of Rs.155 crores for agricultural Research and Education compared to the
provision of Rs.110 crores in 1989-90 - an increase of 41 per cent.
 11

 63. I have already referred to the intention of the Government to make a
beginning in respect of an Employment Guarantee Scheme. The Annual Plan outlay
proposed for the Department of Rural Development is Rs.3,115 crores. It is my intention
to provide some additional funds, within the constraint of resources, to enable an
Employment Guarantee Scheme to be introduced in selected areas.
 64. The Government is pledged to securing a fair deal for the most oppressed,
exploited and deprived sectors of the society, namely, the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes. It is proposed to make a provision of Rs.320 crores for the schemes
for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Annual Plan 1990-91 as against
Rs.269 crores in 1989-90 BE. The Special Central Assistance to Special Component
Plans and Tribal Sub-Plans of States has also been increased.
 65. The Government would intensify the efforts for eradication of illiteracy.
The very fact that millions of voters in the country have to identify the names of
candidates on the ballot papers only from the election symbols is itself a symbol of the
extent of illiteracy. We have made 25 per cent increase in allocation for National
Literacy Mission. Special attention to vocational programmes at all levels will be
given. The process of modernisation of technical education, and support to thrust and
frontier areas in science and technology will be maintained. I am proposing an outlay
of Rs.865 crores for the Department of Education during 1990-91.
 66. In all the programmes of health and family welfare services, special
attention will be paid to the needs of the rural people. I am proposing an outlay of
Rs.950 crores for the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for 1990-91
 67. The Government attaches great significance to the welfare of the weak,
the poor and the deprived living in the urban areas. Major initiatives for employment,
low cost sanitation for liberation of scavengers and provision for night shelters are
proposed to be launched. The plan outlay of the Urban Development Sector is being
increased to Rs.272 crores in 1990-91 from Rs.89 crores in 1989-90BE for this purpose.
 68. The Annual Plan outlays for 1990-91 for the infrastructure sectors are
proposed to be stepped up. The outlays for Petroleum and Natural Gas is proposed to
be increased by 18.6 per cent, Railways by 12.4 per tent and Power by about 10
percent.
 69. The details regarding Central Plan outlays for these and other sectors are
in the Budget documents. I do not wish to take the time of the House in making my
speech a substitute for the-voluminous budget documents, and thus deprive the Members
of the excitement of reading these documents’.
 70. Honourable Members will be happy to know that the Central assistance
for State and UT Plans next year will be Rs.12,848 crores, including the Plan revenue
grants recommended by the Finance Commission as against Rs.10,450 crores excluding
drought assistance provided in Budget Estimates for the current year. Ibis represents
a substantial step up of 22.9 per cent.
 12

 71. Budget Estimates for the next year provide Rs.64,515 crores for non-Plan
expenditure as against Rs.59,220 crores in Revised Estimates for the current year. The
main increase next year is under interest payments provision for which goes up from
Rs.17,710 crores this year to Rs.20,850 crores next year.
 72. The Government have appointed a Committee to consider the issue of
One Rank One Pension in all its aspects. The Report of the Committee is expected by
end of March, 1990 and government will take further action thereafter.
 73. For Defence Services, a provision of Rs.15,750 crores has been made in
the Budget Estimates. This increase in the defence expenditure is not of our choice. It
is the direct result of the situation on our borders.
 74. Freedom struggle is indivisible and therefore it has been decided that
those who fought for Goa’s liberation from the Portugese rule will be eligible for
Union Government’s pension and all other benefits available to other freedom fighters.
 75. The Ninth Finance Commission has submitted its second report covering
the period 1990-95, a copy of which was laid on the Table of the House last week
along with a statement of decisions of Government on the recommendations. These
have been taken into account while framing the Budget for next year. The
recommendations of the Finance Commission accepted by Government will cast an
additional burden of the order of Rs.773 crores on the Central Budget in 1990-91.
 76. Government are alive to the important issue of checking proliferation of
Government expenditure especially in non-priority and non-developmental areas. I
am requesting all the Ministries and Departments to absorb the liabilites on account of
additional instalments of D.A. which will be payable next year from within the budget
provisions made for them by effecting economics and eliminating non-essential
expenditure. I am, therefore, including only a nominal provision of Rs.100 crores in
the next year’s budget as lump sum provision for D.A. This is mainly to meet the
possible requirements of small Departments with limited budgets who may not find it
possible to absorb D.A. increases to the full extent.
 77. On the Receipts side, Gross Tax Revenue at the 1989-90 rate of taxation
is estimated at Rs.57988 crores and the net tax revenue after payment to States of their
share of taxes is placed at Rs.43507 compared to Rs.37798 crores in the Revised
Estimates for die current year.
 78. I have taken a credit of Rs.8000 crores on account of market borrowings
as against Rs.7,400 crores in the current year. External assistance net of repayment is
expected to be of the order of Rs.4327 crores in the next year as against Rs.3901
crores in the current year. Taking into account the other variations in receipts and
expenditure the overall deficit for next year at the 1989-90 rate of taxation is estimated
at Rs.9165 crores.
 13

