 SPEECH OF SHRI Y.B.CHAVAN MINISTER OF FINANCE,
 INTRODUCING THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1972-73


 Sir,
 I rise to present the Revised Estimates for the current year and the Budget
Estimates for 1972-73.
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS: 1971-72
 2. In many ways, the year that is now drawing to a close has been the most
eventful in our recent history. It began in the wake of a clear expression of the will of
our people in favour of 9 bold and radical programme to promote growth with social
justice. But the beginning of the year also witnessed a reign of terror and repression
in East Bengal. By November 1971, some 10 million refugees had sought shelter in
our midst; and we stinted no effort or resources in looking after these hepless and
heroic people. Despite this massive influx and the cost of a war, which was not of our
seeking, we decided not to delay or postpone in any way the equally urgent task of
development and social welfare. Instead, we sought to meet the additional burdens by
two supplementary instalments of fresh taxation, by greater mobilization of voluntary
savings and by a renewed drive for economics in non-Plan expenditure and speedier
tax collections.
 3. Above all, we met the challenge by drawing on the strength of a united
people; and it is possible new to look back on the events of the post year with a degree
of confidence in the economic sphere As well. Despite the extraordinary stresses and
strains which were compounded by natural calamities ever many parts of the country,
it should be possible to end the current fiscal year with our foreign exchange reserves
mere than intact, Government stocks of food grains of nearly 8 million tonnes, the
general price level reasonably stable and a deficit in the Central Budget significantly
lower than what one might have Apprehended.
 4. To some extent, the events of the past year will continue to cast their
shadow over the coming months as well. Honourable Members would appreciate that
we have to assist the friendly people and Government of Bangladesh in their immediate
task of reconstruction and rehabilitation. To the extent that we have drawn upon the
accumulated stocks in the economy and there has been unusual wear and tear of our
productive assets, these will have to be mode good. But above all, now that the refugees
have been able to return to their homes, we have to redirect our energies increasingly
to satisfy the aspirations of our own people. While the resilience and strength displayed
by the Indian economy can give us confidence, there is little room for complacency.
 1

 5. Economic conditions in the recent past contain many pointers to the areas
where further sustained effort is necessary. These have been dealt with at some length
in the Economic Survey. The rate of growth of the economy has slackened in 1971-72.
To some extent, this to understandable as the high rate of growth in the production of
major cereals in earlier years cannot-and indeed need not-be continued year after year.
But this trend should be counter -balanced by an increase in the growth rate of pulses,
commercial crops and industry at large. This has not happened so far. Many of our
baste industries, notably steel And fertilizers, are operating well below capacity.
Shortage of agricultural raw materials has affected important consumer goods industries
such as textiles, sugar and vegetable oils. There are encouraging signs that many
capital goods industries and those producing important intermediate products have
their order books full and are maintaining a satisfactory rate of growth in production.
But here again, progress is by no means uniformly good. Quite apart from tackling the
immediate problems of better management, greater capacity utilization, improved raw
material supply and industrial relation and a general environment of more active-
demand, we have to expedite the creation of additional capacity in a number of vital
areas, including the generation of electricity and fertilizers and steel where better
utilization of existing capacity alone will not sustain demand for long.
 6. There are also other trends which we cannot overlook. While imports,
other than those of food grains, have increased rapidly, this cannot be said of experts.
As a result, the trade gap 10 likely to Widen appreciably in the current fiscal year. The
various Programmes for promoting social welfare which have been taken in hand over
the past two years have yet to gather momentum. Again, despite some signs of
improvement, the level of savings and investment in both the public and the private
sectors is inadequate to sustain a satisfactory rate of growth.
 7. This situation must be rapidly transformed if the objective of growth with
social justice and self-reliance is to be realised soon. Nor is a reasonable degree of
price stability possible without a rapid increase in the production of the basic necessities
of the people. Up to a point, and indeed to a much greater extent than is commonly
realised, growth, social justice, self reliance, investment and mobilization of resources
are all mutually reinforcing processes. We have, however, also to quicken the pace by
appropriate changes in budgetary and other policies. it is precisely in order to bring
about such a coordinated and concerted approach to our economic problems that a
Cabinet Committee on Economic Policy has been recently set up.
REVISED ESTIMATES: 1971-72
 8. Coming to budgetary developments during the current year, 1971-72,
Honourable Members would recall that the provision of Rs.60 crores for refugee
relief made in the Budget last May had to be increased subsequently on two occasions
making a total of Rs.360 crores for the year as a whole. Against this provision, actual
expenditure is now estimated at Rs.325 crores. At this stage, it is difficult to render

 2

any precise account of the aid pledged from abroad which will ultimately compensate
us for the expenditure we ourselves have incurred. A significant part of the refugee
assistance received earlier or in the pipeline is already being diverted to Bangladesh.
But on a rough basis, the budgetary outlay of Rs.325 crores may be offset to the extent
of Rs.120 crores by assistance received from abroad.
 9. We have already made a sizeable beginning with assistance to the
Bangladesh Government in the current year itself. Inclusive of a cash payment of
about Rs.20 crores which is being charged to the rehabilitation Budget, the commitments
so far made for assistance to Bangaladesh amount to roughly Rs.130 crores. It is our
intention to provide for a total commitment in this regard of Rs.200 crores of which
Rs.82 crores might be disbursed during 1971-72 and the balance during 1972-73.
 10. Defence expenditure for 1971-72 is now estimated at Rs.1411 crores as
against the Budget provision of Rs.1241 crores, i.e. an increase of Rs.170 crores. The
expenditure on natural calamities relief at Rs.90 crores would also be higher than the
Budget Estimate of Rs.50 crores.
 11. The actual trend in expenditure on Plan schemes during the current year
is a mixed one and some shortfall in Plan expenditure cannot be ruled out. But there
is reason to believe that the shortfall would not be as great as in the first two years of
the Plan. The implementation of important projects in the steel, fertilizer, petro-
chemicals and atomic energy field has picked up momentum. This is also true of the
programmes with an accent on social welfare which were started in the 1970-71 Budget.
But the two major programmes for employment in the rural areas and for the educated
unemployed which were introduced in the last Budget could not be given proper
shape for some time; and actual expenditure is likely to fall short of the Budget
provision of Rs.75 crores. Once again, our experience in the current year highlights
the fact that the momentum of progress cannot be kept up merely by provision of
finance. Timely preparation and selection of projects and speedy implementation are
equally important.
 12. Receipts under income and Corporation tax are now estimated at Rs.83
crores more than the Budget Estimate reflecting in the main the efforts made towards
speedier tax collection. Union Excise duties will show only a moderate increase of
Rs.31 crores. On the other hand, Customs revenue will exceed Budget estimate by
Rs.118 crores reflecting primarily the spurt in imports.
 13. Receipts from market loans also show, a substantial increase over the
Budget Estimates the actual realisation being Rs.294 crores against the expectation of
Rs.168 crores last May. The nationalised banks have continued to make excellent
progress in deposit mobilization; and the Life Insurance Corporation and the Provident
Funds have also been able to mobilise more funds than was expected earlier. This has

 3

greatly facilitated market borrowings by the Centre in the current year. Collections
under small savings should amount to. Rs.210 crores against Rs.180 crores
assumed earlier.
 14. The overall deficit is now expected to be restricted to Rs.385 crores. This
represents an increase of Rs.153 crores over the Budget Estimate. An increase in
deficit of this order cannot be contemplated with equanimity in a normal year; and its
monetary impact even in the current year was held in cheek by the policy of restraint
followed by the Reserve Bank. But Honourable Members would, I am sure, appreciate
that it has to be judged against the additional liability on account of defence, refugee
relief, assistance to Bangladesh and natural calamities. Expenditure on these four
items alone is now expected to be Rs.1888 crores as against Rs.1351 crores envisaged
last May. Even allowing for additional external assistance for refugee relief, this
represents an increase of Rs.437 crores over the Budget Estimates.
PLAN OUTLAY - 1972-73
 15. Sir, I come now to the Budget provisions for 1972-73. In keeping with the
imperative need to accelerate the pace of growth and social welfare, I propose to
increase the budgetary provision for the Central and centrally-sponsored Plan schemes
from Rs.1455 crores in 1971-72 to Rs.1787 crores in 1972-73. This increase of Rs.332
crores or by nearly one-fourth in a single year represents the sharpest step-up that we
have attempted in the Central sphere over the past so many years. The increase in Plan
outlay is spread over virtually all the sectors of the economy. Agriculture, Community
Development and Cooperation account for an increase of Rs.23 crores; irrigation &
Power, Rs.18 crores; mines and Metals, Rs.23. crores; industry including Petroleum,
Chemicals, Steel and Heavy Engineering, Rs.44 crores; Shipping & Transport, Rs.56
crores; Posts & Telegraphs, Rs.14 crores; Railways, Rs.8 crores and Atomic Energy,
Rs.30 crores.
 16. By far the largest increase is being made in the provisions for these schemes
which combine an element of social welfare with future growth potential. Taking all
such schemes together, the Budget provision in 1972-73 would be Rs.240 crores as
compared to Rs.130 crores in 1971-72. An important innovation relates to a new
lump-sum provision of Rs.125 crores to cover the requirements of rural water supply,
rural home sites, slum clearance and improvement, primary education and schemes
for the educated unemployed. Since there are wide differences in the requirements of
different States for these essential amenities, it is felt that a lump-sum provision of the
nature would make it caster for us to make an impact in each State in the field where
such impact is most urgently needed.
 17. There are large disparities among the States in terms of enrolment of
children in schools in the age group 6-11. lump-sum of primary education facilities,
particularly in the backward areas, will help correct regional imbalance and will also
 4

provide scope for larger employment. Of our 560,000 villages, some 130,000-or almost
25 per cent-are cholera-endemic and guinea-worm infected areas. By tackling the
problems of rural water supply in these disadvantaged areas, it should be possible to
contribute substantially to the well-being of the rural people. The provision for rural
home sites should help particularly landless labour. In some States the need would be
to concentrate mainly on slum clearance and improvement in congested urban areas or
on schemes designed primarily to provide employment to the educated.
 18. Among other schemes, the budgetary provision for the small farmers
development agency is being doubled from Rs.6 crores this year to Rs.12 crores next
year and for marginal farmers and agricultural labourers from Rs.3 crores to Rs.6
crores. Similarly, the provision for special nutritional programmes for children is being
increased from Rs.11 crores to Rs.21.5 crores. Programmes for dry farming
development, rural works in drought-prone areas and the crash programme for rural
employment are being continued with a total provision next year of Rs.72 crores. It is
our hope that in the light of the experience already gained and the assessments recently
made in consultation with the State Governments, it would be possible next year to
utilise in full the provision that is now be” made.
 19. In addition to the provision made in the Budget, resources are also available
for the Central Plan from the internal surpluses of public sector enterprises and by
way of contribution from financial institutions. The internal resources of public sector
enterprises which would be available for the Plan are expected to increase from Rs.233
crores in 1971-72 (Budget Estimates) to Rs.275 crores in 1972-73. Other resources
available for the Central Plan including borrowings ‘from financial institutions and
contributions by the Reserve Bank from retained profits etc. are expected to increase
from Rs.135 crores in the current year to Rs.245 crores in 1972-73. Inclusive of
Budgetary provision as well as internal resources of public enterprises and other extra-
budgetary resources, the total Plan outlay on Central Plan schemes is thus expected to
increase from Rs.1823 crores in 1971-72 to Rs.2307 crores, i.e. by Rs.484 crores or by
about 27 per cent.
STATE PLANS
 20. I am happy to say that there will also be a substantial step up in the Plan
outlays of the States. In the light of the discussions that the Planning Commission has
already had with the State Governments, the annual plan outlay of the States and
Union Territories for 1972-73 is expected to be Rs.1666 crores as compared to Rs.1440
crores in 1971-72. This includes a provision of Rs.782 crores by way of Plan assistance
from the Centre to the States and Union Territories. Honourable Members would also
note that substantial part of the increase in the Central Plan outlay is really on schemes
which are initiated and executed by the State Governments themselves.
 21. In addition to Plan assistance, the scheme of special accommodation by
way of loans to those States which have substantial non-Plan gaps will be continued;
 5

the provision under this head for next year is Rs.130 crores. But the State Governments
on their own will also have to mobilize resources on a substantial scale if the Plan
outlays now proposed for them are to be implemented without recourse to overdrafts
from the Reserve Bank. As the house is aware, the Minister of Planning and I have
been in close touch with the States in this regard. I am well aware that there are
genuine difficulties in some States in liquidating past overdrafts over a short period.
in recognition of these difficulties we have arranged, in consultation with the Planning
Commission, that such States would not be called upon to liquidate their existing
overdrafts immediately but would be asked to repay next year only 15 per cent of the
estimated overdrafts at the end of 1971-72. The State Governments have agreed to
take steps to reduce the overdrafts progressively; and we propose to adopt a new set
of procedures to ensure that overdrafts are not used in future as a continuing mode of
financing State expenditures.
 22. I may also mention in this connection that we propose g to announce soon
the composition and terms of the Sixth Finance Commission. In our federal system,
the evolution of satisfactory financial relations between the Centre and the States has
a vital bearing on progress and harmony in the country at large; and the next Finance
Commission will have a very important role to play in laying the base for the Fifth
Five Year Plan which will be launched two years from now.
OTHER EXPENDITURE AND RECEIPTS: 1972-73
 23. Outside the Plan, every effort is being made to restrict expenditure to the
minimum. The provision for defence next year is being kept at Rs.1408 crores, i.e.,
about the same as the Revised Estimates for the current year. Honourable Members, I
am sure, would appreciate that apart from providing for normal increases in costs,
salaries and dearness allowances, we have also to make adequate provision for
recouping the losses suffered during the war and for looking after the families of those
who have made the supreme sacrifice for the defence of the motherland. It is our
earnest hope and endeavour that out of the anguish and agony of the recent past will
emerge a new spirit of peace and harmony in this great sub-continent so that all its
700 million inhabitants can devote their entire energies against their common enemies
of hunger, want, disease and exploitation of man by man.
 24. I expect the yield from income tax and corporation tax to increase from
Rs.985 crores (Revised Estimates) in the current year to Rs.1060 crores in 1972-73.
Revenues from Excise duties should increase from Rs.2103 crores to Rs.2330 crores
and from Customs duties from Rs.652 crores to Rs.700 crores. The continuance of
special levies which, I am afraid, is unavoidable in the present circumstances, would
bring in Rs.70 crores next year as against Rs.20 crores in the current year.
 25. Unfortunately, a significant part of the additional revenues will be offset
by an increase in food subsidy from Rs.30 crores in the Budget Estimates for the
 6

current year to Rs.100 crores in the Budget Estimates next year. On the basis of
present procurement and issue prices, the burden of food subsidy next year would
amount in fact to Rs.120 crores. I have made a somewhat lower provision of Rs.100
crores as it is our intention not to let this burden grow without appropriate remedial
measures to keep it in cheek.
 26. The welcome increase in food grains production has added to the fiscal
burden in another way. During 1972-73, the additional financial requirements of the
Food Corporation of India for carrying the buffer -stock of food grains are estimated
at Rs.12 0 crores. I am making a budgetary provision in this regard of Rs.25 crores
only so that the balance of Rs.95 crores will have to be found by the Corporation by
additional borrowing from the banking system. At the end of February 1972, the
Corporation’ s borrowings from the banking system had already reached the high
level of Rs.350 crores. A further addition of Rs.95 crores during the coming year will
naturally strain the resources of the banking system unduly unless the demand’s on it
from other sectors are correspondingly moderated. That is why net receipts from market
loans next year are assumed at the level of Rs.215 crores only. Thus, directly or
indirectly,, the procurement of food grains is now having a substantial repercussion on
the Central Exchequer as also on the distribution of income within the country.
 27. Net receipts from external loans next year are also expected to show a
substantial decline from Rs.469 crores this year to Rs.374 crores in 1972-73. Recent
events have once again served as a reminder that even as we strive for greater growth
and social welfare, we cannot neglect the urgent need for reducing the dependence on
external assistance. Our policy to be progressively independent of external assistance
is not directed at anyone other than ourselves. Its thrust is towards invigorating our
own internal efforts. There are a few major areas, such as cotton, oil-seeds, fertilizers,
steel, petroleum products and spare parts for equipment installed in the past where our
dependence on imports is still high. Similarly, our export earnings can be increased
rapidly by creaing additional facilities for mining, fishing and manufacture of a large
variety of engineering and consumer goods. We are making detailed plans in each of
these sectors to increase production rapidly so that our growing requirements can be
met without undue dependence on imports and surpluses created for augmenting
exports. No effort whether by way of provision of finance or otherwise will be spared
to accelerate this process of self-reliance through import substitution and export
promotion.
 28. At existing rates of taxation, the overall budgetary deficit next year will
be Rs.375 crores. There will be a surplus on revenue account of Rs.219 crores, but
this would be more than offset by the deficit on capital account of Rs.594 crores.
IN SUM
 29. To sum up, the main feature of the Budget for 1972-73 which I am now
presenting is the substantial increase in the outlay on the Plan. The budgetary provision
 7

for the Central Plan proper is being increased by Rs.332 crores or nearly 23 per cent.
Inclusive of internal surplus and other extra-budgetary resources, the increase in the
Central Plan works out to Rs.484 crores, or 27 per cent. Taking the Centre, the States
and the Union Territories together, the total provision for the Plan for the next year, as
now envisaged, comes to Rs.3973 crores as against Rs.3263 crores in the current year,
i.e., an increase of Rs.710 crores, or 22 per cent. A substantial increase in Plan outlay
of this order would be a major factor contributing to economic growth over the coming
months. It has been our experience that an increase in Plan outlay in the public sector
is a prerequisite for revival of industrial production whether in the public or in the
private sector. It is our expectation, therefore, that the increase in Plan outlay next
year will serve as a catalyst for the revival of growth particularly in the industrial
sector where recent trends leave much to be desired.
 30. Within the total Budget provision for the Plan at the Centre, as much as
Rs.240 crores is being earmarked for schemes with an accent on social justice as well
as economic growth. I am well aware that even this provision of Rs.240 crores is
modest as compared to the magnitude of the problem. But I am sure, Honourable
Members would agree that it represents a sincere effort towards meeting the basic
minimum needs of the most disadvantaged sections of our society.
 31. It is a matter of some satisfaction that despite the substantial increase in
Plan outlay and without any credit for mobilization of additional resources, the overall
deficit in the Central Budget for 1972-73 is now expected to be limited to Rs.375
crores. This satisfactory outcome is the result mainly of the fact that during the past
critical year, we were able to introduce what amounts virtually to three different budgets
with substantial measures for additional resource mobilization. The total receipts on
account of the taxation measures introduced last year will be of the order of Rs.500
crores in a full year.
 32. Important as the Central Budget is as an instrument for furthering our
social and economic objectives, it has to be supplemented by basic changes in our
economic institutions and policies. During the last year, Government has taken a number
of steps in this direction. The taking over of the management of general insurance, the
guidelines given to financial institutions is regard to convertibility of leans into equity
and participation in the management of the enterprises assisted by them, continued
effort to direct the new vitality of the nationalised banking system towards improvement
in the economic conditions of the small and new entrepreneurs in industry and
agriculture and the policy of differential interest rates-these are all various facets of
the same thrust forward towards the goal of economic progress with social justice.
Honourable Members may rest assured that we shall continue our. efforts in the same
spirit and over a broad front over the coming months so that the mandate for creating
a socialist society is carried out with speed and vigour.

 8

