SPEECH OF SHRI Y.B.CHAVAN MINISTER OF FINANCE INTRODUCING
 THE BUDGET FOR THE YEAR 1971-72 (FINAL)


 Sir,
 On the 24th of March this year, I had presented to the Honourable House an
interim Budget for 1971-72. I had then assured Honourable Members that the Budget
proper to be presented in the current Session will provide for a significant increase in
the outlays on development and social welfare over and beyond what the interim
Budget had indicated. It is in fulfilment of this commitment that I rise before you
today.
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
 2. Earlier this week, the Government have laid on the floor of the Honourable
House the Economic Survey for 1970-71. The Survey shows that the economy presents
in general a promising picture indeed and that it is now better poised to tackle the
tasks ahead than at any other time in recent years. We have once more been able to
fulfil during 1970-71 the target set in the Fourth Plan with respect to the overall rate
of economic growth. In agriculture, progress has been maintained; food grains
production has continued to expand at a most satisfactory rate. In the industrial sector,
lack of certain essential raw materials has hampered production in some areas and
there is still under-utilisation of capacity in a few other areas. But new grounds have
been broken in our import substitution efforts, and recovery from the years of recession
in the middle 1960’s is considerable. Besides, the growth in the small-scale sector is
most encouraging. Enough symptoms abound which indicate that once a significant
improvement occurs in the scale of public investments, industry as a whole will surge
forward. After a few initial set-backs, there has been a remarkable spurt in exports
towards the later months of the year. Better organisation is, however, still the major
outstanding task for both industry and exports. Apart from raw material shortages and
procedural delays, we have also to face problems of low scales of operations and high
unit cost in some industries. Cost reduction and improvement in efficiency are thus
vital for imparting a new dynamism to industrial growth and exports.
 3. In agriculture too, there is yet no occasion to relent on our efforts. We
must continue the search for high-yielding varieties of paddy which will prove durable
in our varying agro-climatic conditions. Irrigation facilities will have to be expanded
to ensure the extensive propagation of double cropping. Our search for better pest-
resistant qualities of seeds for millets must go on. The greatest area of responsibility
will lie in improving the productivity per hectare of pulses and the cash crops, including
cotton, oilseeds and jute. During 1970-71, there was a marked stability occasionally
 1

even a certain fall-in food grain prices. In fact, but for the Government’s price support
operations intended to protect the farmers, there would have been a steeper order of
decline in these prices. Despite this, there was an overall increase in the general price
level largely induced by the shortage in the availability of commercial crops. Against
this background, we cannot accelerate our rate of growth with price stability unless
we raise the output of commercial crops.
 4. On the external side, while we can take credit for repaying our outstanding
obligations to the International Monetary Fund, our balance of payments is not as
satisfying as it was at the end of 1969-70. Exports have shown a remarkable
improvement. At the same time, with the rising tempo of industrial activity, imports
have been going up. Outstanding import licences suggest that there will be a further
increase in imports during the current year. Because of shortage in steel, cotton, oils
and oilseeds, we have had to plan for much larger imports than originally envisaged.
Fresh aid allocations have declined during the past year even as the burden of debt
servicing has continued to mount. Net aid available to finance imports has, therefore,
shrunk. Thus we can scarcely afford to relax in the matter of a prudent management
of our balance of payments.
REORIENTATION OF POLICIES
 5. The massive mandate which this Government received from the people
three months ago was a mandate for socialism, a mandate for rapid economic growth
matched by increased social justice. There can be little doubt that social justice
must begin with increasing the opportunities of job and work for every one. A good
deal has been done in the course of the past year to initiate measures for creating
gainful work for the urban unemployed as well as the rural under-employed. During
the past year, the nationalised banks have expanded their scale of operations so as
to provide more credit to the hitherto neglected sectors and for purposes of self-
employment. They intend to do much more in future. A crash programme for rural
employment has been announced and the Government’s broad objective is to ensure
employment to at least one person in each family in all parts of the country. At the
same time, the Government is determined that such schemes for creating employment
do not take the form of ad hoe measures but contribute to the accretion of additional
physical assets in the countryside in the form of new roads, land reclamation, land
development, drainage, etc.
 6. Honourable Members will also remember that special works programmes
were introduced last year to improve job opportunities in the countryside, particularly
for the small farmers and in the backward areas. These schemes will continue. In
addition, as I shall describe presently, we propose to make a special budgetary provision
for assisting the educated unemployed in their search for a constructive opportunity to
serve the nation.

 2

 7. The largest stimulus to employment can, however, come only by increasing
the tempo of economic activity all round. It is therefore essential that expenditure
under the Plan is maintained on projected levels and that no shortfalls occur. I am
afraid that our performance in 1970-71 in this respect leaves much to be desired.
While I am proposing to increase significantly the Plan outlays over what was allocated
last year, the emphasis has to be even more on the timely implementation of Plan
projects for which budgetary provision is being made.
 8. Faster growth and greater social justice will be elusive goals unless pursued
in a milieu of relative price stability. We can scarcely ignore the adverse effects of
unabated price increases on both investment and income distribution. Inflation also
dislocates attempts to increase the efficiency of production and to lower unit cost,
which in turn affects exports. There is therefore need for continuous vigilance. The
drive for a faster rate of growth in this sense, therefore, blends with the parallel goal
of achieving Price stability. In this task, we must also keep under examination the
operation of the monetary forces.
 9. Our procedure for formulating annual Plans is itself in the nature of a
reassessment of Plan priorities and objectives. At the present juncture, when we have
just received a new mandate, it is also necessary to make a fresh appraisal of the Plan
as a whole. The emphasis from now on has to be on measures which will speed up the
process of implementation of projects, foster the expansion of employment opportunities
and reduce disparities, including regional disparities. Honourable Members are aware
of the various steps taken in recent years for encouraging growth, including growth of
industry in the backward areas through allocation of Plan assistance and similar fiscal
and other means. The same objective has to be kept in mind in the allocation of our
foreign exchange resources including those mobilised through external assistance.
Schemes intended for backward areas have to be given due consideration at the stage
of the formulation of the Plan itself, so that in the general allotment of internal and
external resources under the Plan, the different parts of the country, and particularly
the retarded regions, get their due share.
 10. Our public sector enterprises have deepened and widened the industrial
base of the economy and achieved certain basic social objectives. Efficient performance
on the part of these enterprises is crucial for the Government’s overall development
effort. The extent of buoyancy that can be added to the economy each year will be
largely related to the ability of the - public sector to implement the Plan proposals.
Administrative and procedural delays which hold back progress of these enterprises
are thus matters of considerable concern. Similarly, the public sector has to yield a
sizeable sun- plus, since this surplus is a key source of future growth. During the past
year, a number of steps have been taken to raise the general efficiency of public
enterprises. Increasing attention is being devoted for the proper maintenance of
inventories as well as of plant and machinery in each public sector unit, and towards
 3

tackling the problem of personnel management and industrial relations. In regard to
the latter, we would certainly like to have the advice and counsel of trade unions.
They have an equal stake in the efficiency of the public sector. I hope that, with their
cooperation, it will be possible to initiate a new chapter of industrial relations in our
public enterprises.
 11. A large segment of the commercial banks is also now a part of the public
sector. Here too, I would seek the cooperation of the trade union leaders to improve
the efficiency of the banking system. A beginning was made recently when I initiated
a dialogue with the employees and the management of the banks; our discussions
covered such areas as credit planning and deposit mobilisation. I propose to continue
this practice. The new Boards of Directors, the composition of which will be announced
soon and which will include representatives of the Award staff and officers, will, I
hope, carry forward the task of improving the procedures and policies, of the banks
along intended lines.
 12. Each of the nationalised banks has been urged to have an annual credit
plan which could ensure that the credit apportioned to the different sectors, and
particularly the sectors neglected hitherto, is in conformity with their needs and at the
same time within the norms of monetary expansion. The Committee appointed by the
Reserve Bank of India to suggest credit schemes for promoting self-employment has
made a number of valuable suggestions which are being given shape to by the
commercial banks. Another committee which was asked to recommend a scheme of
differential lending rates for helping the smaller borrowers and the weaker sections of
the community has just submitted its report. A Credit Guarantee Corporation has been
set up with effect from first April to underwrite the advances offered by banks to
small borrowers. Honourable Members are also aware that the Government have
recently framed the guidelines for the conversion into equity of loans offered by
public financial institutions. These guidelines should go a long way to promote the
establishment of a joint sector to which we attach considerable significance.
 13. Honourable Members, I am sure, are happy with our decision to take over
the business of general insurance in the country. This decision marks a culmination of
the process which was started when we nationalised the Imperial Bank of India and
the life insurance business and to which we gave a major thrust less than two years
ago through nationalisation of major commercial banks. With these measures, virtually
all the savings of the people mobilised by financial institutions can now be deployed
in accordance with national priorities.
REVISED ESTIMATES, 1970-71
 14. In the Interim Budget, I had indicated that the year 1970-71 will close
with an overall deficit of Rs.230 crores. The Budget documents I am presenting today
repeat from the Interim Budget the Revised Estimates for 1970-71, since actuals are
 4

not yet available in most cases. According to the latest indications, however, the overall
deficit for 1970-71, I am afraid, may be of the order of 270 crores.
 15. While presenting the Interim Budget, I had occasion to express concern
over the fact that a number of States were overdrawing their accounts with the Reserve
Bank of India. I regret to say that despite the increased special assistance of Rs.195
crores to the States during 1970-7 1, there has been no abatement in the States’ recourse
to overdrafts from the Reserve Bank as will be evident from the fact that, at the end
of last March, as many as 14 States had overdrafts aggregating to Rs.260 crores. The
special assistance to States, which was designed to help them to fulfil their targets of
Plan outlays, is to taper off in the coming years. In this context, the problem of
overdrafts assumes an additional gravity. I would appeal to the States to maximise
their efforts for raising additional resources and to enforce the strictest discipline on
the growth of non-Plan expenditure.
BUDGET ESTIMATES, 1971-72
 16. Honourable Members will recall that in the Interim Budget I had provided
a sum of Rs.1, 195 crores for the Central Plan for 1971-72, that is, at the same level
as in the Budget for 1970-71. I had then stated that the provision for the Central Plan
for the current year was to be augmented following a review of requirements and
resources. I propose to raise the outlay under the Central Plan by Rs.155 crores, that
is, to Rs.1,350 crores. This represents an increase of more than Rs.300 crores over the
likely actual level of expenditure in 1970-71. The more important areas where the
budgetary provisions have been significantly raised over what was provided in the
Interim Budget include shipping (Rs.16 crores), ports (Rs.13 crores), roads (Rs.10
crores). mines and metals (Rs.9 crores), health and family planning (Rs.12 crores),
Posts & Telegraphs (Rs.11 crores), agriculture (Rs.32 crores) and food procurement
(Rs.18 crores). I had already provided in full in the Interim Budget the sum of Rs.785
crores towards Central assistance for the Plans of the States and the Union Territories,
as against a provision of Rs.711 crores in the Budget for 1970-71.
 17. For creating immediate employment opportunities, even a larger Plan outlay
may not be enough in the short period. I have therefore decided to add a further trust to
the public sector outlay which could both generate additional employment and provide
relief to the weaker sections of the community. For the crash programme for rural
employment a provision of Rs.50 crores was already made in the March Budget. BM the
problem of unemployment is equally acute among our educated young men and women.
We are determined not to permit them to be a lost and frustrated generation. We propose
to assist them actively so that they might set themselves up in gainful creative endeavours
which would at the same time accelerate the pace of economic progress of the country.
To this end, in the Budget I am now presenting, we propose to allot a further sum of
Rs.25 crores for schemes specially designed to suit the educated unemployed including
engineers and technicians. The details of these schemes are being worked out in
consultation with the Planning Commission and the Ministries concerned.
 5

 18. Honourable Members will be glad to know that the provision of Rs.4
crores made in the Interim Budget for a nutrition programme for children is now being
raised to Rs.10 crores, and included in the Plan. I have no illusion that even this larger
provision will mean much more than a beginning in the task of protecting and nurturing
the health and welfare of the poor children. I do hope that, in this matter, we will be
in a position to do substantially more in the coming years. I might also mention here
that we propose to reserve 25 per cent of fresh admissions to public schools for
meritorious candidates, who will be offered Government scholarships.
 19. The special provisions made last year for improvement of slums are being
maintained. The work of the Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority will be
pursued with vigour. I would also like to state here that the Government would consider
sympathetically proposals for a similar improvement in living conditions for slum
dwellers in other metropolitan cities and towns; if State Governments and municipal
bodies could initiate viable schemes for this purpose, we will consider the question of
financial accommodation.
 20. Finally, I have to refer to the tragedy that has been enacted over the past
two months in East Bengal representing some of the darkest episodes in human history.
Already, some three million evacuees have crossed over the borders. It is our hope and
endeavour that all these unfortunate people will be able soon to return to their homes
and hearths in dignity and honour. Meanwhile, we shall do our utmost to offer succour
and relief to all those who have taken temporary shelter with us. It will clearly be
beyond our capability to meet on our own the financial burden involved we regard it
as the responsibility of the international community to share with us this burden. In
the Budget, I have tentatively made a provision of Rs.60 crores for providing relief to
the evacuees from East Bengal. For the present we have taken credit on the revenue
side to the extent of Rs.20 crores which we expect will accrue to the Budget by way
of external assistance for the relief of the evacuees. In addition, it is our hope that
substantial supplies from abroad will be available for providing relief without being
routed through the Budget. Honourable Members will note that the provision we have
made will suffice only for a limited period and that a considerably higher order of
assistance from the international community will be necessary.
 21. Let me now sum up the overall budgetary picture as it emerges following
the increase in the Plan outlay, the provision for employment assistance, and certain
inescapable additions to the non-Plan items of expenditure since the presentation of
the Interim Budget in March. Apart from the provision for evacuee relief, I might
mention in particular the addition in the expenditure on account of food subsidy,
which is now placed at Rs.30 crores instead of Rs.10 crores as indicated in the Interim
Budget. On present reckoning, the revenue receipts in 1971-72 are likely to be of the
order of Rs.3, 562 crores. Expenditure to be met from revenue will amount to Rs.3,587
crores. Thus the revenue surplus, placed in the Interim Budget at Rs.114 crores, will

 6

now turn into a deficit of R s. 25 crores. On the capital side, collections under the
various small savings schemes are now expected to be Rs.180 crores as against Rs.155
crores indicated in the Interim Budget; correspondingly, however, loans to the States
will also go up by Rs.16 crores, so that the net increase under this head will be only
Rs.9 crores. I have also taken credit for an additional accrual of Rs.40 crores under PL
480 receipts representing largely the spill-over from 197 0-7 1. Total capital receipts,
inclusive of loans and advances and transactions under various debt deposit heads- are
now placed at Rs.2, 024 crores and total capital expenditure, including loans and
advances, is estimated at Rs.2,396 crores. The capital budget will, therefore, show a
deficit of Rs.372 crores as against Rs.354 crores in the Interim Budget. The over-all
budgetary gap, taking revenue and capital accounts together, will now be of the order
of Rs.397 crores. This takes into account the effect on the Central Budget -of the
changes in Railway fares and freight rates announced a few days ago and of changes
in the Post and Telegraph tariff to which I will refer a little later.
 22. Honourable Members, I am sure, would not like me to leave uncovered a
deficit of this magnitude in the Budget. I will, therefore, seek their indulgence if I
have now to turn to what all of you, I am sure, are waiting for, namely, proposals to
bring down the deficit to a more tolerable order.




 PART ‘B’
 23. The task of raising additional resources through fresh imposts on the people
is the least enviable of a Finance Minister’s responsibility. If I still have to approach
this House with proposals to raise additional resources, it is because of the imperatives
of the situation, including the need to augment the Plan outlay, to create additional
employment opportunities and to offer succour to the evacuees from East Bengal.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
 24. In framing these proposals, I have endeavoured to follow certain broad
principles. These are:
 (a) The tax structure must be simplified and rationalised in such a way that
 the burden of assessment for the assessee as well as the tax collector and
 the opportunities for evasion are minimised;
 (b) The overall burden of taxation must be distributed amongst the different
 sections of the community in such a manner that, in the process, there is
 an appreciable scaling down of the concentration of economic power and
 reduction in the inequalities in income and wealth; and
 (c) The incidence of the fresh imposts should not, as far as possible, disturb
 the general level of prices of essential goods.
 7

 25. Accordingly, the concentration of the additional tax effort, to the extent
feasible, should be on direct taxes, particularly on the affluent groups, and on such
categories of indirect taxes as affect the luxury and near-luxury commodities. In so far
as we succeed in limiting the burden of indirect levies on the ‘ latter group of
commodities, we are also able to achieve in part the other objective of improving the
structure of income distribution in society.
TAX ADMINISTRATION
 26. The tightening and streamlining of tax administration has two facets. First,
it helps to garner additional yield from the existing tax sources and thus makes it less
necessary to look for fresh tax heads every year. Second, since it is generally the well-
to-do and the rich who avoid and evade taxes, a tightening of tax administration,
including closing of loopholes, would compel them to part with a larger proportion of
their incomes and assets and would therefore further one of the overriding objectives
of fiscal policy.
 27. Under valuation of property has been one of the means to evade wealth
tax, capital gains tax and stamp duties. It has also been an important avenue for the
circulation of black money. This practice could be greatly discouraged if Government
had the power to acquire properties at prices that correspond to what is recorded in
sale deeds. Accordingly, we propose to move a Bill during the current session to
acquire this power. I hope it would not be considered dishonourable to take a dishonest
man at his word.
 28. In pursuance of the Administrative Reforms Commission’s
recommendations, it is also proposed to sponsor legislation in the current session to
discourage benami holding of property. If, at the time of assessment, a person fails to
declare income from a piece of property or the property itself so as to evade payment
of income and wealth taxes, the intended legislation will debar him from enforcing his
claim to such property in a court of law.
 29. Pursuant to the recommendations of Administrative Reforms Commission,
we further propose to transfer the work of recovery of arrears of estate duty from the
State Governments to the Income Tax Department at the Centre. Since, in this matter,
we can move only with the concurrence of the State Legislatures, a Bill is being
drafted for circulation among the States.
 30. It is proposed to strengthen the Valuation Cell located in the Central Board
of Direct Taxes for making valuation of buildings in order to enable it to extend its
activities and speed up valuations in cases involving the assessment of wealth tax. For
assessment of income tax, under the new procedure which has come into effect from
the current year, summary assessments will be completed in most cases which do not
involve substantial points of dispute, and only a small proportion of the cases will be
subjected to a sample scrutiny subsequently. This will enable the Income Tax Officers
to devote correspondingly more time for cases involving substantial revenue.
 8

 31. In the field of excise duties, I propose to set up a Committee to review the
Self Removal Procedure scheme, which has been in operation for the last two to three
years, with a view to suggesting improvements which could reduce leakage of revenue.
A Study Team, which considered the issues relating to over and under- invoicing, have
made a number of suggestions for checking the leakage of foreign exchange through
manipulation of invoice values. The Government will give early consideration to
implement its recommendations. With a similar purpose, a comprehensive review is
being undertaken of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act; and we propose to introduce
soon a Bill to amend several provisions of this Act.
CONSULTATION WITH STATES
 32. In the past, at the Centre, we have taken several fiscal steps to discourage
the growth and concentration of excessive income and wealth in a few hands in the
urban areas. The constitutional prerogative of the Union Government to initiate
measures for similar reforms in the countryside is however severely restricted. But
this does not mean that some of the present anomalies must continue, or that we can
be oblivious of growing inequalities in rural areas. Ultimately, the basis of tax has to
be the size of income or wealth irrespective of whether it is derived from agricultural
or non-agricultural sources.
 33. Similarly, there are constitutional limitations on the powers of the Centre
to tax services even when these are of a luxury or semi-luxury character. As the States
and the Centre have to share the responsibility of raising resources for economic
development, it is the duty and obligation of the Centre to point out to the States
untapped resources for mobilisation where the Union Government itself is precluded
by the constitutional provisions to impose any levy. It is my intention to consult and
seek the advice of the State Finance Ministers on the entire range of these issues and
to remain in continuous touch with them so that a concerted view is taken.
