 1




 Budget 2000-2001

 Speech of

 Shri Yashwant Sinha
 Minister of Finance

 29th February, 2000

 PART A


Sir,
 I rise to present the first budget of this millennium.
 2. This budget for 2000-2001 has some other firsts to its credit also. It is the
first budget of the new Government which took office in October 1999 under the
visionary leadership of Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee. It is also the first budget of the
second half century of our Republic and the first budget of the new century. I hope
it will add many more firsts to its credit as time goes by. I thank the Hon’ble Prime
Minister for entrusting me with this historic responsibility which I stand here to
discharge in all humility.
 3. The year 1999-2000 has been a year of many challenges: the 50 day war in
Kashmir, the super cyclone in Orissa, long months of political uncertainty before the
general elections, a somewhat weak monsoon, a near tripling of world oil prices and
the continued fragility in world economic recovery. Nevertheless, we have met these
challenges resolutely, accomplished a great deal and the nation is stronger as a
result.
 4. The economy’s performance is described in detail in the Economic Survey
I laid before the House yesterday. Let me just touch a few highlights. A broad-based
industrial recovery is under way. Despite lower growth of agriculture due to inclement
weather, overall economic growth this year is expected to be nearly 6%. The
infrastructure sector is performing much better. For the first time in 17 years the
inflation rate has stayed below 4% for 42 consecutive weeks. Even more remarkable,
the Consumer Price Index (Industrial Workers) in November 1999 showed zero
increase over the previous November. This is an enormous boon for the weakest
sections of our society. Public food stocks are at record levels. Exports have achieved
a remarkable turn around from negative growth last year to nearly 13% growth in
dollar terms in April-December, 1999. Our software exports are also booming.

 1

 2
Although surging international oil prices have increased our oil import bill by more
than $6 billion, our foreign exchange reserves have nevertheless attained new record
levels. With the return of investor confidence our stock markets have also soared to
new heights.
 5. In my last two budgets I have addressed the accumulated shortcomings in
our policies and freed our companies to compete globally. We have strengthened our
agricultural sector, energised our financial markets and laid the foundations of an
exciting new economy. With this, my third budget, I propose to put India on a
sustained, equitable and job-creating growth path of 7 to 8% per year in order to
banish the scourge of poverty from our land within a decade. The next 10 years will
be India’s decade of development. To achieve this objective our strategy must
encompass the following elements:
 ♦ Strengthen the foundations of growth of our rural economy, especially
 agriculture and allied activities.
 ♦ Nurture the revolutionary potential of the new knowledge-based industries
 such as infotech, biotechnology and pharmaceuticals.
 ♦ Strengthen and modernise traditional industries such as textiles, leather,
 agro processing and the SSI sector.
 ♦ Mount a sustained assault on infrastructure bottlenecks in power, roads,
 ports, telecom, railways and airways.
 ♦ Accord the highest priority to human resource development through
 programmes and policies in education, health and other social services,
 with special emphasis on the poorest and weakest sections of society.
 ♦ Strengthen our role in the world economy through rapid growth of exports,
 higher foreign investment and prudent external debt management.
 ♦ Establish a credible framework of fiscal discipline, without which the other
 elements of our strategy can fail.
 6. In all these areas we must pursue thorough-going economic reforms to
unlock the creative energies of our people and thus reap the gains of productivity
growth. But our reforms must also be guided by compassion and justice. In his
Address to Parliament in October 1999 the President has set out the broad outlines
of our programme of second generation reforms. This budget carries forward the
process of implementation.
Fiscal Management
 7. Today, we must squarely confront and overcome the critical challenge posed
by a weakening fiscal situation. A long history of high fiscal deficits has left us with
a legacy of a huge public debt and an ever-growing bill of interest payments. This
year we have incurred unanticipated expenditure on national defence, elections and
the super cyclone in Orissa. The residual impact of the Fifth Pay Commission and
the need for special fiscal assistance to the States have added to our burden. All
this, combined with shortfalls in receipts from disinvestment and revenue, has raised
our net borrowing requirements (our fiscal deficit) to over Rs.1,00,000 crore. This
will add about Rs.10,000 crore to our interest bill next year. We must also find
additional resources for Plan, Defence and for additional transfers to States under
the interim award of the Eleventh Finance Commission. If we do not raise the resources

 3
and instead take recourse to even higher borrowing next year, then we will jeopardise
our prospects for growth, reignite the flames of inflation, sow the seeds of another
balance of payments crisis and place an unfair burden on the next generation.
 8. We must put our fiscal house in order. This means hard decisions and
sacrifices. At the same time we must preserve the intrinsic dynamism of our economy,
which alone can deliver sustained growth with social justice. For this reason, despite
the severe fiscal strain, the budget support to the plan is being increased by Rs.11,100
crore to a level of Rs.88,100 crore compared to Rs.77,000 crore in B.E. 1999-2000.
 9. Similarly, there cannot be any compromise on Defence. Our forces have
once again demonstrated in Operation Vijay that they are second to none in the
world. Government is committed to enhance the quality of our defence preparedness
and to modernise our forces. In this budget I have made a provision of Rs.58,587
crore for defence, which is nearly Rs.13,000 crore more than in B.E. for the current
year. This represents the largest ever increase in the defence budget in any single
year. More will be provided whenever needed. We shall not shrink from making any
sacrifice to guard and protect every inch of our beloved motherland.
 10. Over the years the composition of Central Government expenditure has
become highly rigid and prone to large, pre-committed increases. More than half of
the annual budget outlays are transfer payments. Interest payments, Defence, Internal
Security, Major Subsidies, Salaries, Allowances and Pensions and non-plan grants
to States account for about 95% of non-plan expenditure and about 70% of total
expenditure. To curb built-in expenditure growth and bring about structural changes
in the composition of our expenditure, I am introducing the following initiatives.
 ♦ All ongoing schemes will be subjected to rigorous zero base budgeting
 scrutiny. I had announced this initiative last year and I am glad that this
 exercise has been completed in 8 Departments. As a result 69 schemes
 are to be discontinued or merged. This process will be completed in a
 timebound manner in the remaining Departments.
 ♦ The manpower requirements of Government departments will be reassessed
 by reviewing the norms for creation of posts.
 ♦ Fresh recruitment in Government departments and institutions will be
 limited to minimum essential needs.
 ♦ The scheme for redeployment of surplus staff will be made more effefctive
 and will provide facilities for retraining. A VRS scheme will also be introduced
 for staff in the surplus pool.
 ♦ All subsidies will be reviewed with a view to bringing in cost-based user
 charges wherever feasible.
 ♦ No new autonomous institutions will be created without approval of Cabinet.
 Budgetary support to autonomous institutions will be reviewed and they
 will be encouraged to maximise generation of internal resources.
 ♦ In order to align with the overall interest rate structure, the interest rate on
 General Provident Funds is being reduced by 1% to 11% from 1.4.2000.
 ♦ Excessive domestic borrowings to finance current expenditure has resulted
 in debt service payments approaching unsustainable levels. To reduce
 expenditure on this account, a portion of the disinvestment proceeds will
 be earmarked for retiring Government debt. An initial provision of Rs.1,000

 4
 crore has been made in the budget for this purpose.
 I will have something more to say on major subsidies a little later.
 11. These measures are necessary and are only a beginning. We shall pursue
resolutely the objective of downsizing Government and prepare a roadmap for the
purpose. For medium-term management of the fiscal deficit we also need the support
of a strong institutional mechanism embodied in a Fiscal Responsibility Act. This
had been suggested in the Agenda for Governance of the National Democratic Alliance.
I have set up a committee to examine this issue and make suitable recommendations.
I hope to bring the necessary legislative proposals to the House during the course of
the year.
 12. The challenge of fiscal management is not confined to the Central
Government. The financial position of the State Governments has deteriorated sharply
in the last few years. Revenue deficits have widened and borrowings are being
increasingly used to meet revenue expenditure. Fiscal reform at the State level has
acquired great urgency. While we have gone out of our way to help State Governments,
the determination shown by some States to deal with these issues has also helped
enormously. It will be my endeavour to take further collective measures in the next
year for promoting fiscal reforms in the States. The final report of the Eleventh
Finance Commission will provide valuable inputs for taking policy initiatives in this
regard.
Agriculture and Rural Development
 13. It is my firm belief that sustained and broad-based growth of agriculture is
essential for alleviating poverty, generating incomes and employment, assuring food
security and sustaining a buoyant domestic market for industry and services.
 14. We must take all necessary measures to strengthen the rural economy.
Credit flow to agriculture through institutional channels of commercial banks,
cooperative banks and Regional Rural Banks is estimated at about Rs.41,800 crore
this year. It is expected to increase by over 20 per cent to a level of Rs.51,500 crore
in 2000-2001. In my last two budgets we have launched a wide array of initiatives to
promote the flow of rural credit. In this budget I propose to strengthen the earlier
programmes and launch further initiatives:
 ♦ The Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) managed by NABARD
 has emerged as a popular and effective scheme for financing rural
 infrastructure projects. Last year I had announced an enhanced allocation
 of Rs.3,500 crore from the banking sector for RIDF V and extended the
 repayment period of loans to 7 years. The scope of RIDF was also widened
 to allow lending to Gram Panchayats, Self Help Groups, NGOs and other
 eligible organisations for implementing village level infrastructure projects.
 This year the corpus of RIDF VI will be increased to Rs.4,500 crore and the
 interest charged on this lending will be reduced by half a percent.
 ♦ Micro finance has emerged as an effective tool for alleviating poverty in
 many countries. In my last budget I had asked NABARD and SIDBI to
 cover 50,000 Self Help Groups to develop micro enterprises. NABARD by
 itself is likely to link 50,000 such Groups to banks during the current year.
 NABARD and SIDBI will cover an additional one lakh Groups during 2000-
 2001. To give a further boost to this programme a Micro Finance

 5
 Development Fund will be created in NABARD with a start up contribution
 of Rs.100 crore from RBI, NABARD, banks and others. This Fund will provide
 start up funds to micro finance institutions and infrastructure support for
 training and systems management and data building. Special emphasis
 will be placed on promotion of micro enterprises in rural areas set up by
 vulnerable sections including women, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes
 and Other Backward Classes.
 ♦ The cooperative system is a crucial channel for credit in rural areas. However,
 over time, problems have developed, mainly because of excessive
 bureaucratization and the overlapping jurisdiction of State Governments
 and NABARD. Some State Governments have already taken legislative action
 to promote genuinely cooperative institutions. For rural credit, clear
 delineation of the supervisory role of RBI/NABARD on banking matters is
 also essential. To promote these two prerequisites for a more vibrant rural
 cooperative credit system I propose to establish a Fund in NABARD. The
 details will be worked out in the light of the forthcoming recommendations
 of the Capoor Committee earlier constituted by Government. In the
 meantime, RBI is advising the banks to accord priority to the credit needs
 of those cooperatives which are entirely controlled by user-members and
 managed by them prudently.
 ♦ The programme of Kisan Credit Cards is progressing very well. Cooperative
 Banks, Regional Rural Banks and Commercial Banks together have so far
 issued more than 50 lakh cards and card-cum-pass books to the farmers.
 I am asking NABARD and Commercial Banks to redouble their promotional
 efforts so as to issue an additional 75 lakh Kisan Credit Cards by March
 2001.
 ♦ Due to our efforts at recapitalizing RRBs, 158 RRBs are posting operating
 profits. Out of these, 48 RRBs have been able to wipe out their accumulated
 losses. In view of the importance of the RRBs in rural financing, we will
 continue with this programme of strengthening the RRBs.
 15. The Planning Commission and the Ministry of Agriculture have worked out
modalities to integrate 28 ongoing separate Centrally Sponsored Schemes of
agricultural development into one comprehensive programme. This will weed out
duplication, enhance the productivity of the support programme and accord greater
flexibility to State Governments to develop and pursue activities on the basis of
regional priorities. This is a major step forward towards the goals of convergence
and decentralisation that I had outlined in my budget last year.
 16. There is urgent need to review and coordinate our long-term strategy at the
National and the State levels on the pattern of land use in the country, development
of agriculture in relation to the agro-climatic conditions in the different regions and
preservation of our forest resources. We need to adopt an integrated approach to a
number of related subjects such as preservation and development of the forest wealth,
optimum utilisation of the wasteland, watershed development, safeguarding bio-
diversity etc. In view of the complexity of the issues involved, a National Commission
on Land Use Policy comprising of experts in the relevant fields will be set up to

 6
examine the various aspects and make appropriate recommendations to Government.
 17. Our Government stands fully committed to ensure that the fruits of economic
reforms are shared by all sections of society, especially those living in rural areas
and more particularly the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
Classes. Five elements of social and economic infrastructure are critical to the quality
of life specially in rural areas: health, education, drinking water, housing and roads.
 18. Even after 52 years of Independence the provision of basic services in rural
areas remains very unsatisfactory. Forty per cent of our villages are without proper
roads; 1.8 lakh villages do not have a primary school within 1 km; 4.5 lakh villages
have drinking water problems; some estimates indicate a shortage of 140 lakh rural
dwelling units; rural health infrastructure suffers from large deficiencies. These large
gaps in basic services in rural areas are not acceptable and Government is committed
to removing them rapidly.
 19. Universalisation of elementary education is one of our key objectives. A
new Department of Elementary Education and Literacy has already been created
under the Ministry of Human Resources Development to give a new thrust and focus
to these efforts. Some new initiatives include a scheme for universalisation of
elementary education called “Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan” which would enable all children
to enroll by 2003 and expansion of the District Primary Education Programme to
cover the remaining districts in Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Orissa and Gujarat. On
the literacy front the National Literacy Mission would be revamped so that the literacy
rate can be raised to 75% by the year 2005. The plan allocation for elementary
education has been increased from Rs.2,931 crore to Rs.3,729 crore next year. A
new Department of Drinking Water Supply in the Ministry of Rural Development has
been set up to intensify the efforts and accelerate the pace of coverage. Our objective
is to provide drinking water facilities in all rural habitations in the next five years. It
is proposed to cover around 60,000 habitations and 30,000 schools in the next year.
The outlay of the Department is being enhanced to Rs.2,100 crore from Rs.1,807
crore this year. The Reproductive and Child Health programme will receive Rs.1,051
crore as against an allocation of Rs.695 crore in 1999-2000. For rural housing
schemes a provision of Rs.1,710 crore has been made.
 20. To impart greater momentum to these efforts I am announcing the launching
of a new scheme, the “Pradhan Mantri Gramodaya Yojana” with the objective of
undertaking time bound programmes to fulfill these critical needs of the rural people.
I am providing a sum of Rs.5,000 crore separately for this Scheme in the budget.
Out of this a sum of Rs.2,500 crore will be earmarked for launching a nationwide
programme of constructing rural roads and improving rural connectivity. Under the
Scheme, Central assistance will be provided to States for implementing specific
projects in these sectors. The concerned Ministries in the Central Government will
lay down the guidelines and monitor the implementation of these programmes. The
erstwhile Basic Minimum Services Scheme will be merged with the new Scheme.
Thus the overall provision in the budget for schemes concerning the five basic needs
of the rural population is more than Rs.13,000 crore.
Rural Housing
 21. “Housing for All” has been identified as a priority area in the Agenda for
Governance. For the coming financial year, a goal of providing 25 lakh dwelling
units in rural areas has been fixed. Schemes for meeting the needs of different

 7
sections of society have been prepared.
 (i) Under Indira Awas Yojana, it is proposed to provide more than 12 lakh
 houses for the people below poverty line. For this purpose, an amount of
 Rs.1,501 crore is being provided in the budget.
 (ii) For families with an annual income of below Rs.32,000 per annum,
 assistance will be provided for construction of 1 lakh houses under credit-
 cum-subsidy Scheme. An amount of Rs.92 crore is being provided in the
 budget for this scheme.
 (iii) The National Housing Bank will provide refinance to banks and housing
 finance companies for construction of 1.5 lakh houses under Golden Jubilee
 Rural Housing Finance Scheme.
 (iv) To further improve the availability of housing finance in rural areas,
 Government have decided to provide equity support of Rs.350 crore to
 HUDCO during the Ninth Plan period. Of this, Rs.200 crore have already
 been released and it is proposed to release a further amount of Rs.100
 crore in the next year. With this enhanced equity support, HUDCO will be
 able to leverage these funds and raise further resources to facilitate and
 provide finance for the construction of about 9 lakh houses in the rural
 areas in the coming financial year.
 (v) The cooperative sector and voluntary agencies etc. will support the
 construction of another 1.5 lakh houses.
Social Security for the Poor
 22. More than one third of our population still lives below the poverty line.
There is an imperative need to extend some social security cover to the poorest
sections of our society. I have decided to introduce a new scheme of group insurance,
“Janashree Bima Yojana”, under which beneficiaries will have insurance cover of
Rs.20,000 in case of natural death, Rs.50,000 in case of accidental death or total
permanent disability and Rs.25,000 for partial permanent disability due to accident.
Premia will be fixed on an actuarial basis. Below poverty line participants in this
Scheme will pay only half the premium, with the remainder being contributed from
earnings of LIC’s existing Social Security Fund, suitably augmented by Government.
On this basis, the monthly premium to be paid by the beneficiary is expected to be
Rs.10 or less. This scheme will lay a firm foundation for insurance cover to the
poorest in our country.
Empowerment of Women
 23. There is an urgent need for improving the access of women to national
resources and for ensuring their rightful place in the mainstream of economic
development. Towards this objective, the Government will set up a Task Force under
an eminent person to review all existing legislation and Government schemes
pertaining to the role of women in the national economy. This Task Force will help
us chalk out specific programmes for observing 2001 as “Women’s Empowerment
Year”.
Population, Health and Environment
 24. Government have recently announced a new National Population Policy a
key objective of which is to bring down total fertility rates to replacement levels by
2010. To operationalise this objective, the plan allocation of the Department of
Family Welfare has been increased from Rs.2,920 crore in B.E. 1999-2000 to Rs.3,520

 8
crore next year.
 25. Recognising the role of the Indian systems of medicine and homeopathy in
our health care, the plan allocation for the concerned Department is being doubled.
Emphasis will be placed on drug standardisation, quality control, modernising the
colleges, drug testing laboratories and formulations. This will also help in boosting
exports of herbal formulations.
 26. We must preserve and nurture our forests and environment for future
generations. Funds are being provided for regeneration of mangroves and creation
of shelterbelts along the coastal line, bamboo regeneration and afforestation
programme, encouragement of medicinal plants and eco-tourism. Preservation of
the rural environment will raise the living standards of millions belonging to the
weakest sections of our society.
Small Scale Industry
 27. The SSI sector plays a vital role in industrial production, employment
generation and exports. In the context of growing domestic and international
competition, our strategy is to support this sector through promotional policies of
credit and technology. For improving credit flow to SSI units, I propose the following:
 ♦ The requirement of providing collateral security is a major bottleneck to
 the flow of bank credit to very small units. RBI has recently issued
 instructions to dispense with the collateral requirement for loans up to
 Rs.1 lakh. The limit is being further increased for the tiny sector from Rs.1
 lakh to Rs.5 lakh.
 ♦ The existing composite loan scheme of SIDBI and banks helps small
 borrowers by providing working capital and term loans through a single
 window. To promote credit flow to small borrowers, the composite loan
 limit is being increased from Rs.5 lakh to Rs.10 lakh.
 ♦ I am asking the public sector banks to accelerate their programme of SSI
 branches to ensure that every district and SSI clusters within districts are
 served by at least one specialised SSI bank branch. Furthermore, to improve
 the quality of banking services, SSI branches are being asked to obtain ISO
 certification.
 ♦ Last year, I had announced that a credit guarantee scheme for SSI will be
 launched. I am glad to inform the House that a new Central Scheme for
 this purpose has been formulated and a provision for Rs.100 crore has
 been made in the budget. The Scheme will be implemented through SIDBI
 and will cover loans upto Rs.10 lakhs from the banking sector. The
 guaranteed loans will be securitised and will be tradeable in the secondary
 debt market.
 28. SIDBI operates the National Equity Fund Scheme under which equity
support is provided for projects up to Rs.15 lakh. To further help SSI entrepreneurs,
this limit will be raised from Rs.15 lakh to 25 lakh.
 29. SIDBI is presently administering the Technology Development Modernisation
Fund Scheme for assisting technology development and modernisation of SSI units.
The Scheme has certain concessional features including interest at prime lending
rate for direct assistance and refinancing at 2% below prime rate for indirect finance.

 9
The operation of this scheme is being extended by another 3 years.
 30. The Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC) has been playing a
very important role as an instrument to generate large scale employment in the
rural areas with low per capita investment. Government will continue to encourage
the Khadi and Village Industry Sector so that its products can become more
competitive. For intensifying marketing efforts, the KVIC will introduce a common
brand name for its products and also set up a professionally managed marketing
company for domestic as well as export marketing.
Industry and Capital Market
 31. In earlier millennia, India led the world on the basis of knowledge. Today
history is repeating itself. Young Indian entrepreneurs are at the forefront of the
infotech revolution, whether in Silicon Valley, Bangalore or Hyderabad. They have
shown us how ideas, knowledge, entrepreneurship and technology can combine to
yield unprecedented growth of incomes, employment and wealth. Companies
unknown 5 years ago have become world leaders. We must do everything possible to
promote this flowering of knowledge-based enterprise and job creation.
 32. A key ingredient for future success lies in Venture Capital Finance. After a
thorough review, I am proposing a major liberalisation of the tax treatment for venture
capital funds. I will describe the details later. To simplify the procedures, SEBI will
be the single point nodal agency for registration and regulation of both domestic and
overseas venture capital funds. Venture activity is not limited to dot.com companies!
Ideas and entrepreneurship, which merit venture finance, can be found in all sectors
of the economy. The tax laws and SEBI guidelines are being formulated accordingly.
I should add that this liberalisation will give a strong boost for Non Resident Indians
in Silicon Valley and elsewhere to invest some of their capital, knowledge and
enterprise in ventures in their motherland.
 33. In recent months stock markets have been buoyant all over the world,
including India. Experience has taught us that there can be hard times as well. It is
in such difficult times that institutions like investor protection funds of stock
exchanges become really important. I will have something to say on this in part B of
my speech.
 34. Thanks to our prudent macro-economic management and calibrated
approach to currency convertibility, we have successfully weathered the East Asian
crisis of the past two years. But we must not confuse caution with timidity. We must
encourage Indian firms and businesses to grow into strong, India-based
multinationals. To promote this trend, it is necessary to accord our firms increasing
flexibility to undertake capital account transactions, especially for acquisitions of
businesses abroad. Last month, Government had announced a policy to allow Indian
companies to raise funds for investments through issue of ADRs/GDRs without
prior Government approval. Up to 50% of these proceeds can be used by them to
acquire companies in overseas market. We had also announced on 27th December,
1999, a liberalized mechanism for acquisition of software companies in the overseas
market through stock swap options up to US$100 million on an automatic basis. I
plan to further liberalize this policy for acquisition of companies abroad to enable
Indian corporates, in knowledge-based sectors to grow rapidly and lay the foundation
for Indian multinationals in areas where we have comparative economic advantage.

 10
For acquisition in other sectors too, I propose to increase the ceiling under the
automatic route from existing US$15 million to US$50 million for Indian corporates
and beyond this, through approval by the Committee on Overseas Investment.
 35. Under existing policy on portfolio investment, Foreign Institutional Investors
(FIIs) are permitted to invest in a company, upto an aggregate of 24% of equity
shares, which can be increased to 30% subject to approval by the Board of Directors
and a Special Resolution of the General Body of the Company. To give our best
companies greater access to foreign portfolio investment, I am increasing this limit
from 30% to 40%.
Science and Technology
 36. The sustained growth of our knowledge-based industries will ultimately
depend on the quality and extent of scientific and technological progress and training
in our society. We must harness our potential in science and technology to realise
the dream of modern India envisioned by the Prime Minister in his address to the
Indian Science Congress last month. For taking up relevant technology vision projects
and for increasing cooperation between our Universities and R&D institutions, I am
making an additional provision of Rs.50 crore in the budget of the Technology
Information Forecasting and Assessment Council under the Department of Science
and Technology. I am also making a provision of Rs.50 crore in the budget of the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for launching a New Millennium
Indian Technology Leadership Initiative. It will focus on areas which fulfil national
objectives and will be based on partnership between the Government and private
s e c t o r.
 37. To fully benefit from the new intellectual property rights regime, we need to
encourage our scientists and R&D institutions to maximise their patenting efforts.
Government have decided to allow Universities and Research Institutions to retain
the revenue generated from intellectual property rights through publicly funded
research and also share a part of the revenue with the inventor.
 38. Modernisation of the Patent Office and the Trade Mark Register is long
overdue. Government have sanctioned a modernisation project of Rs.75 crore for
the Patent Office and we will strive to remove all impediments for early implementation
of this project.
Banking and Finance
 39. The recent East Asian crisis has underlined the critical importance of
undertaking reforms to strengthen the banking sector. In recent years, RBI has
been prescribing prudential norms for banks broadly consistent with international
practice. To meet the minimum capital adequacy norms set by RBI and to enable the
banks to expand their operations, public sector banks will need more capital. With
the Government budget under severe strain, such capital has to be raised from the
public which will result in reduction in Government shareholding. To facilitate this
process, Government have decided to accept the recommendations of the Narasimham
Committee on Banking Sector Reforms for reducing the requirement of minimum
shareholding by Government in nationalised banks to 33%. This will be done without
changing the public sector character of banks and while ensuring that fresh issue of
shares is widely held by the public. The Committee had also expressed the view that
the Boards of the banks should have sufficient autonomy to take decisions on

 11
corporate strategy and all aspects of business management and be responsible to
the stakeholders, that is, the shareholders, the customers, the employees and the
public at large. In particular, the interests of the employees of the nationalised Banks
will be fully safeguarded. It is proposed to bring about necessary changes in the
legislative provisions to accord necessary flexibility and autonomy to the Boards of
the banks.
 40. As Honourable Members are aware, the Report of the Working Group on
Restructuring Weak Public Sector Banks had suggested the constitution of a Financial
Restructuring Authority (FRA). It has been decided to have a modified version of the
FRA. Thus, in respect of any bank which is considered to be weak or potentially
weak, the statutes governing public sector banks would be amended to provide for
supersession of the Board of Directors on the basis of recommendations of the RBI
and constitution of a FRA for such a bank, comprising experts and professionals.
The amendments would also enable the FRA to exercise special powers including all
the powers of the Board of the bank.
 41. Government will not close down any public sector bank. As responsible
owner of the banks, Government have decided to consider recapitalisation of the
weak banks to achieve the prescribed capital adequacy norms, provided a viable
restructuring programme acceptable to the Government as the owner and the RBI
as the regulator is made available by the concerned banks.
 42. The high level of Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) in our public sector banks
is a cause for continued concern. Efficient and effective mechanisms for recovery of
bank dues are critically important for reducing NPAs. I am happy to inform the
House that comprehensive amendments have been carried out to the Recovery of
Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 by issue of Ordinance. Five
more Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRT) and four more Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunals
have been set up or are in advanced stage of being set up. I further propose to set up
four more DRTs at Mumbai and one more DRT each at Calcutta, Delhi and Chennai
to facilitate expeditious adjudication and recovery of dues of banks and financial
institutions.
 43. The growth of fresh NPAs can also be curbed through better institutional
mechanisms for sharing of credit related information on borrowers and potential
borrowers among banks and financial institutions. A Working Group constituted by
RBI to examine modalities for setting up a Credit Information Bureau has recently
submitted its report. Based on its recommendation a Credit Information Bureau will
soon be established.
 44. In the fast changing world of modern finance it has become necessary to
accord greater operational flexibility to the RBI for conduct of monetary policy and
regulation of the financial system. Accordingly, I intend to bring to Parliament
proposals for amending the relevant legislation.
 45. Similarly, to facilitate development of the Government debt market the
legislative framework needs to be strengthened and modernised through a
Government Securities Act, which I propose to bring to replace the old Public Debt
Act, 1944.
 46. The Industrial Investment Bank of India is the only Calcutta-based

 12
development financial institution. To enable it to improve its viability and profitability
by diversifying and extending its business, Government will subscribe to the
preference capital of the company.
 47. NBFCs perform a significant role as financial intermediaries and in
promoting growth of industry and services. Over the past 3 years RBI has taken a
number of measures for strengthening the regulation of this sector with a view to
ensuring that only financially sound and well run NBFCs are permitted to accept
public deposits. I propose to bring a new bill which will strengthen the hands of
depositors in situations of malafide or fraudulent actions of NBFCs.
Infrastructure
 48. Infrastructure services remain a key bottleneck to rapid and sustained
growth of our economy. We have made substantial progress in encouraging private
infrastructure service providers and in establishing independent regulatory
frameworks in most infrastructure sectors. We have also sought to give greater
operational and commercial autonomy to existing public entities in these sectors.
We will be moving ahead with programmes for corporatisation of public sector service
providers in the areas of telecommunications, ports and airports during the course
of the coming year.
 49. The Prime Minister has announced a major initiative for road development,
the National Highways Development Project (NHDP). The cost of the project is
estimated at around Rs.54,000 crore. In my earlier budgets, I had announced the
levy of cess of one rupee per litre on petrol and diesel and a substantial part of this
is expected to be available for funding the NHDP. To further augment resources, for
commercially viable components of this project, I shall have something more to say
in Part B of my speech.
 50. The plan outlay for the Central PSUs in the power sector has been increased
from Rs.7,626 crore to Rs.9,194 crore. Increased budgetary support has been provided
for the Tehri Hydro and the Nathpa Jakhari Hydro projects so that both these projects
can be commissioned by March 2002. For commissioning of high priority projects by
SEBs/State generating companies, a provision of Rs.300 crore has also been made
for subsidizing interest on loans from Power Finance Corporation.
 51. In order to give a fillip to the reform process in the power sector and for
undertaking investments on renovation and modernisation of old and inefficient
plants and for strengthening the distribution system, a new scheme for providing
assistance to State utilities will be introduced. Under this scheme, additional Central
Plan assistance of Rs.1,000 crore will be provided to State and Union Territory
Governments.
 52. The State Electricity Boards have large overdues to the Central Sector Power
and Coal utilities. A Scheme for securitisation of these dues with the support of
Central Government has been finalized to assist the SEBs to clear these dues. Central
Government support will be linked to reforms in the operation of SEBs.
 53. Hon’ble members are aware that the Sethu Samudram Ship Canal Project
has the potential of providing a shorter route between the East and West Coast

 13
Ports. I am glad to inform that Government have approved the undertaking of a
detailed feasibility study and environmental impact assessment of the project at a
total cost of Rs.4.8 crore. I have made necessary provision for this in the budget.
Disinvestment/Privatisation/Public Sector Restructuring
 54. Government’s policy towards the public sector is clear and unambiguous.
Its main elements are :-
 ♦ Restructure and revive potentialy viable PSUs;
 ♦ Close down PSUs which cannot be revived;
 ♦ Bring down Government equity in all non-strategic PSUs to 26% or lower, if
 necessary; and
 ♦ Fully protect the interests of workers.

 55. In line with this policy during the last two years financial restructuring of
20 PSUs has been approved by Government. As a result, many PSUs have been able
to restructure their operations, improve productivity and achieve a turn around in
performance. Hon’ble members are aware that Government have recently approved
a comprehensive package for restructuring of SAIL, one of our Navaratna PSUs.
 56. There are many PSUs which are sick and not capable of being revived. The
only remaining option is to close down these undertakings after providing an
acceptable safety net for the employees and workers. Resources under the National
Renewal Fund have not been sufficient to meet the cost of Voluntary Separation
Scheme (VSS) for such PSUs. At the same time, these PSUs have assets, which if
unbundled and realised, can be used for funding VSS. Government will put in place
mechanisms to raise resources from the market against the security of these assets
and use these funds to provide an adequate safety-net to workers and employees.
 57. Government have recently established a new Department for Disinvestment
to establish a systematic policy approach to disinvestment and privatisation and to
give a fresh impetus to this programme, which will emphasize increasingly on strategic
sales of identified PSUs. Government equity in all non-strategic PSUs will be reduced
to 26% or less and the interests of the workers will be fully protected. The entire
receipt from disinvestment and privatisation will be used for meeting expenditure in
social sectors, restructuring of PSUs and retiring public debt.
The North-East Region
 58. Government is committed to the speedy economic development of the North-
Eastern States and Sikkim. Priority is being given for development of infrastructure,
specially airports, railways, power and national highways so as to remove the sense
of isolation perceived in many parts of the North-East. To provide more facilities for
vocational education, 50 more Industrial Training Institutes and 446 Computer
Information Centres would be established in the North-Eastern States within the
next two years.
 59. For realizing the potential for agricultural and horticultural development
in the North-East, schemes for minor irrigation and horticulture will be encouraged.
A Technology Mission for horticultural development in the North-Eastern States will

 14
also be launched.
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
 60. To promote literacy and to improve the education standards of persons
belonging to Scheduled Castes, a new thrust will be given to the Post-Matric
Scholarship Scheme. The budgetary provision for this Scheme is being increased
from Rs.72 crore to Rs.130 crore. Emphasis under this Scheme will be on female
literacy. Our Prime Minister has announced that it will be our national goal to liberate
and rehabilitate around 6 lakh Scavengers in the country. A new strategy will be
devised under which Scavengers will be organized into self-help cooperatives and
provided assistance from the Government and the concerned Finance Development
Corporations. To give a greater focus to the welfare of Scheduled Tribes, a new
Ministry of Tribal Affairs has been set up. The plan allocation of Tribal welfare has
been substantially stepped up from Rs.684 crore to Rs.810 crore.
Revised Estimates for 1999-2000
 61. This has been a difficult year for the budget marked by expenditure over-
runs and some deceleration in tax collection. The increase in budgeted expenditure
has been 7% whereas shortfall in budgeted tax collection is estimated to be 4%. The
non-plan expenditure has increased by Rs.17,461 crore (8.4% over budget estimate
of Rs.2,06,882 crore) and the plan expenditure by Rs.2,395 crore (3.1% over budget
estimate of Rs.77,000 crore). Major increases in non-plan expenditure are on account
of pension payments (Rs.4,173 crore), interest payments (Rs.3,425 crore), Extended
Ways and Means Advances to States (Rs.3,000 crore), Defence (Rs.2,810 crore),
Interest subsidies (Rs.1,304 crore), food subsidy (Rs.1,000 crore), postal deficit (Rs.848
crore) and assistance to States from the National Calamity Relief Fund (Rs.1,064
crore). On the plan side, main increases are on account of National Highway
Development (Rs.1,900 crore), State roads (Rs.1,000 crore), Railway safety ( Rs.200
crore), special assistance to Jammu and Kashmir and enhanced assistance to States
for externally aided projects. About Rs.500 crore are expected to be released for
projects/schemes in the North Eastern Region and Sikkim out of the savings from
the budget of different Central Ministries.
 62. Net tax revenues for the Centre are estimated at Rs.1,26,469 crore against
Rs.1,32,365 crore budgeted, reflecting a shortfall of about Rs.5,900 crore. The shortfall
is mainly due to lower customs revenue because of very low growth in the dollar
value of non-oil imports and lower excise revenue resulting from low inflation in
manufactured products for most of the year. Disinvestment receipts are expected to
be Rs.2,600 crore against Rs.10,000 crore budgeted.
 63. The fiscal deficit is thus likely to increase to 5.6% of GDP from the budget
target of 4.0%.
Budget Estimates for 2000-2001
 64. In the budget estimates for 2000-2001, the total expenditure is estimated
at Rs.3,38,487 crore, of which Rs.88,100 crore is for plan and Rs.2,50,387 crore for
non-plan.
Plan Expenditure
 65. The budget support for Central, State and UT Plans has been placed at
Rs.88,100 crore, marking an increase of Rs.8,705 crore over revised estimates

 15
1999-2000. Gross budgetary support for the Central Plan is being enhanced from
Rs.43,661 crore in the revised estimates 1999-2000 to Rs.51,276 crore. Total Central
Plan outlay at Rs.1,17,334 crore will be more by Rs.21,024 crore from the last year ’s
level of Rs.96,310 crore, a hefty 22% increase. The plan for 2000-2001 focuses on
basic infrastructure with energy, transport and communications accounting for 60%
of total Central Plan Outlay. The Outlay for Social Services marks an increase of
21.5% over 1999-2000 R.E.
 66. Central Plan assistance to States and Union Territories in 2000-2001 is
placed at Rs.36,824 crore as compared to Rs.35,735 crore in the revised estimates
1999-2000.
Non Plan Expenditure
 67. Non-plan expenditure in 2000-2001 is estimated to be Rs.2,50,387 crore
compared to Rs.2,24,343 crore in Revised estimates for 1999-2000, showing an
increase of Rs.26,044 crore. The increase in non-plan expenditure is mainly in
defence (Rs.10,083 crore), interest payments (Rs.9,841 crore) and in grants to States
(Rs.9,392 crore). However, this increase is sought to be partially offset by reduction
in outgo on account of food and fertiliser subsidies.
 68. Major subsidies, on food and fertilizer, constitute a significant portion of
our non-plan expenditure. The rate at which these subsidy payments are growing is
not sustainable. We need to target the subsidies to those who are poor and needy,
whereas others should pay for what they consume. Indeed, we want to expand the
access to subsidised food by Below Poverty Line (BPL) families so that they can meet
their basic nutritional needs. Accordingly, from next year, we are doubling the
allocation of foodgrains to BPL families, under the Targetted PDS, from 10 Kg. to 20
kg. This will result in an enormous gain in food security for our poorest families. The
issue price of foodgrains of BPL families is being fixed at 50% of economic cost in line
with the decision taken by Government in December, 1996. The net effect of these
measures will be to improve the monetary food budget of BPL families and vastly
enhance their food security. This achievement is possible only by simultaneously
fixing the PDS issue price for APL families at the economic cost. In respect of sugar,
no allocation will be made under PDS for income tax assessees. For others, keeping
in view the increase in the levy price of sugar, the issue price under PDS is being
fixed at Rs.13 per kg. As a result of these measures I expect to keep the expenditure
on food and sugar subsidy at Rs.8,210 crore in 2000-2001.
 69. In the case of Fertilizer Subsidy, Members are aware that our present
Retention Price Scheme suffers from many shortcomings. Much of the subsidy goes
to producers and not to farmers. To encourage greater efficiency of our fertilizer
units, some rationalisation of the Retention Price Scheme, including capping of capital
related charges, will be implemented from next year. The Ministry of Chemicals and
Fertilizers will also bring out soon a road map for phasing out the Retention Price
Scheme in the medium-term. Separately, to take into account the rising cost of
inputs, the maximum retail price of Urea is being raised by 15%. The rate of concession
in the case of decontrolled fertilizer is also being reduced. However, to moderate the
impact on prices the MRP of DAP and MOP is being raised only by 7% and 15%
respectively. I expect that, because of these changes and some rationalisation of

 16
Retention Price Scheme, the expenditure on fertilizer subsidy will be Rs.12,651 crore
in 2000-2001.
 70. The Eleventh Finance Commission has since submitted its interim report
for making provisional arrangements of tax devolution and grants to States for 2000-
2001. Government have accepted the devolution formula and quantum of grants to
States, as recommended by the Commission in its interim report. I have made
provisions in the budget accordingly.

