 Budget 2018-2019
 Speech of
 Arun Jaitley
 Minister of Finance

 February 1, 2018


 Section I

 Governance, Economy and Development

Madam Speaker,
1. I rise to present the Budget for 2018-19.

2. Madam, four years ago, we pledged to the people of India to give
this nation an honest, clean and transparent Government. We promised a
leadership capable of taking difficult decisions and restoring strong
performance of Indian economy. We promised to reduce poverty,
expedite infrastructure creation and build a strong, confident and a New
India. When our Government took over, India was considered a part of
fragile 5; a nation suffering from policy paralysis and corruption. We have
decisively reversed this. The Government, led by Prime Minister, Shri
Narendra Modi, has successfully implemented a series of fundamental
structural reforms. With the result, India stands out among the fastest
growing economies of the world.

3. The journey of economic reforms during the past few years has been
challenging but rewarding. As a result of the reforms undertaken by the
Government, foreign direct investment has gone up. Measures taken by the
Government have made it much easier to do business in India. Natural
resources are now allocated in a transparent and honest manner. There is a
premium on honesty. There was a time when corruption was common-
place. Today, our people, especially our youths, are curious to lead their
lives honestly. The indirect tax system, with introduction of Goods and
Services Tax, has been made simpler. Benefits to the poor have been
targeted more effectively with use of digital technology. The
demonetization of high value currency has reduced the quantum of cash
currency and circulation in India. It has increased the taxation base and
spurred greater digitization of the economy. The Insolvency and

 2

Bankruptcy Code (IBC) has changed the lender-debtor relationship. The
recapitalized banks will now have a greater ability to support growth. All
these structural reforms in the medium and long run will help Indian
economy achieve stronger growth for a long time.

4. Indian economy has performed very well since our Government
took over in May, 2014. India achieved an average growth of 7.5% in first
three years of our Government. Indian economy is now 2.5 trillion dollar
economy – seventh largest in the world. India is expected to become the
fifth largest economy very soon. On Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) basis,
we are already the third largest economy.

5. Indian society, polity and economy had shown remarkable
resilience in adjusting with the structural reforms. GDP growth at 6.3% in
the second quarter signaled turnaround of the economy. We hope to
grow at 7.2% to 7.5% in the second half. IMF, in its latest Update, has
forecast that India will grow at 7.4% next year. Manufacturing sector is
back on good growth path. The services, mainstay of our growth, have
also resumed their high growth rates of 8% plus. Our exports are expected
to grow at 15% in 2017-18. We are now firmly on course to achieve high
growth of 8% plus.

6. We have taken up programmes to direct the benefits of structural
changes and good growth to reach farmers, poor and other vulnerable
sections of our society and to uplift the under-developed regions. This
year’s Budget will consolidate these gains and particularly focus on
strengthening agriculture and rural economy, provision of good health
care to economically less privileged, taking care of senior citizens,
infrastructure creation and working with the States to provide more
resources for improving the quality of education in the country.

7. Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi has always stressed importance
of good governance. He has articulated the vision of ‘‘Minimum
Government and Maximum Governance’’. This vision has inspired
Government agencies in carrying out hundreds of reforms in policies, rules
and procedures. This transformation is reflected in improvement of India’s
ranking by 42 places in last three years in the World Bank’s ‘Ease of Doing
Business’ with India breaking into top 100 for the first time. I would like
to congratulate all those who worked to achieve this.

8. Now, our Government has taken Ease of Doing business further by
stress on 'Ease of Living' for the common men of this country, especially for
those belonging to poor & middle class of the society. Good governance

 3

also aims at minimum interference by the government in the life of
common people of the country.

9. Government is providing free LPG connections to the poor of this
country through Ujjwala Yojana. Under Saubhagya Yojna 4 crore household
are being provided with electricity connections. More than 800 medicines
are being sold at lower price through more than 3 thousand Jan Aushadhi
Centres. Cost of stents have been controlled. Special scheme for free
dialysis of poor have been initiated. Persons belonging to poor and middle
class are also being provided a great relief in interest rates on housing
schemes. Efforts are being made to provide all government services,
whether bus or train tickets or individual certificates on line. These include
passports which may be delivered at doorstep in two or three days or
Company registration in one day time and these facilities have benefited a
large section of our country. Certificate attestation is not mandatory,
interviews for appointment in Group C and Group D posts have been done
away with. These measures have saved time and money of lakhs of our
youth. Our Government by using modern technology is committed to
provide a relief to those who suffer because of rigid rules and regulations.

10. Madam, while undertaking these reforms and programmes, we
have worked sincerely and without weighing the political costs. Our
Government has ensured that benefits reach eligible beneficiaries and are
delivered to them directly. Many services and benefits are being delivered
to the people at their doorsteps or in their accounts. It has reduced
corruption and cost of delivery and has eliminated middlemen in the
process. Direct Benefit Transfer mechanism of India is the biggest such
exercise in the world and is a global success story.

 Section II
 Investment, Expenditure and Policy Initiatives
 Agriculture and Rural Economy

11. My Government is committed for the welfare of farmers. For
decades, country’s agriculture policy and programme had remained
production centric. We have sought to effect a paradigm shift. Honourable
Prime Minister gave a clarion call to double farmers’ income by 2022
when India celebrates its 75th year of independence. Our emphasis is on
generating higher incomes for farmers. We consider agriculture as an
enterprise and want to help farmers produce more from the same land
parcel at lesser cost and simultaneously realize higher prices for their

 4

produce. Our emphasis is also on generating productive and gainful on-
farm and non-farm employment for the farmers and landless families.

12. Madam Speaker, as a result of the hard work of our country's
farmers agriculture production in our country is at a record level. Doing the
year 2016-17 we achieved a record food grain production of around 275
million tonnes and around 300 million tonnes of fruits and vegetables.

13. Madam Speaker, in our party's manifesto it has been stated that the
farmers should realize at least 50 per cent more than the cost of their
produce, in other words, one and a half times of the cost of their
production. Government have been very much sensitive to this resolutions
and it has declared Minimum support price (MSP) for the majority of rabi
crops at least at one and a half times the cost involved. Now, we have
decided to implement this resolution as a principle for the rest of crops. I
am pleased to announce that as per pre-determined principle, Government
has decided to keep MSP for the all unannounced crops of kharif at least at
one and half times of their production cost. I am confident that this historic
decision will prove an important step towards doubling the income of our
farmers.

14. Our Government works with the holistic approach of solving any
issue rather than in fragments. Increasing MSP is not adequate and it is
more important that farmers should get full benefit of the announced MSP.
For this, it is essential that if price of the agriculture produce market is less
than MSP, then in that case Government should purchase either at MSP or
work in a manner to provide MSP for the farmers through some other
mechanism. Niti Ayog, in consultation with Central and State Governments,
will put in place a fool-proof mechanism so that farmers will get adequate
price for their produce.

15. For better price realization, farmers need to make decisions based
on prices likely to be available after its harvest. Government will create an
institutional mechanism, with participation of all concerned Ministries, to
develop appropriate policies and practices for price and demand forecast,
use of futures and options market, expansion of warehouse depository
system and to take decisions about specific exports and imports related
measures.

16. Madam Speaker, last year, I had announced strengthening of
e-NAM and to expand coverage of e-NAM to 585 APMCs. 470 APMCs have
been connected to e-NAM network and rest will be connected by March,
2018.

 5

17. More than 86% of our farmers are small and marginal. They are
not always in a position to directly transact at APMCs and other wholesale
markets. We will develop and upgrade existing 22,000 rural haats into
Gramin Agricultural Markets (GrAMs). In these GrAMs, physical
infrastructure will be strengthened using MGNREGA and other
Government Schemes. These GrAMs, electronically linked to e-NAM and
exempted from regulations of APMCs, will provide farmers facility to make
direct sale to consumers and bulk purchasers.

18. An Agri-Market Infrastructure Fund with a corpus of `2000 crore
will be set up for developing and upgrading agricultural marketing
infrastructure in the 22000 Grameen Agricultural Markets (GrAMs) and 585
APMCs.

19. Task of connecting all eligible habitations with an all-weather road
has been substantially completed, with the target date brought forward to
March, 2019 from March 2022. It is now time to strengthen and widen its
ambit further to include major link routes which connect habitations to
agricultural and rural markets (GrAMs), higher secondary schools and
hospitals. Prime Minister Gram Sadak Yojana Phase III will include such
linkages.

20. For several years, we have been stating that India is primarily an
agriculture based country. As India is primarily an agriculture based country,
our districts can specialize in some or other agricultural produce and be
known for it. But special attention is lacking in this regard. There is a need
to develop cluster based model in a scientific manner for identified
agriculture produces in our districts in the same manner as we have
developed model for industrial sector.

21. Cultivation of horticulture crops in clusters bring advantages of
scales of operations and can spur establishment of entire chain from
production to marketing, besides giving recognition to the districts for
specific crops. The Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare will reorient
its ongoing Schemes and promote cluster based development of agri-
commodities and regions in partnership with the Ministries of Food
Processing, Commerce and other allied Ministries.

22. Our Government has promoted organic farming in a big way.
Organic farming by Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) and Village
Producers’ Organizations (VPOs) in large clusters, preferably of 1000
hectares each, will be encouraged. Women Self Help Groups (SHGs) will

 6

also be encouraged to take up organic agriculture in clusters under
National Rural Livelihood Programme.

23. Our ecology supports cultivation of highly specialized medicinal and
aromatic plants. India is also home to a large number of small and cottage
industries that manufacture perfumes, essential oils and other associated
products. Our Government shall support organized cultivation and
associated industry. I propose to allocate a sum of `200 crore for this
purpose.

24. Food Processing sector is growing at an average rate of 8% per
annum. Prime Minister Krishi Sampada Yojana is our flagship programme
for boosting investment in food processing. Allocation of Ministry of Food
Processing is being doubled from `715 crore in
RE 2017-18 to `1400 crore in BE 2018-19. Government will promote
establishment of specialized agro-processing financial institutions in this
sector.

25. Tomato, onion and potato are basic vegetables consumed
throughout the year. However, seasonal and regional production of these
perishable commodities pose a challenge in connecting farmers and
consumers in a manner that satisfies both. My Government proposes to
launch an ‘‘Operation Greens’’ on the lines of ‘‘Operation Flood’’.
‘‘Operation Greens’’ shall promote Farmer Producers Organizations (FPOs),
agri-logistics, processing facilities and professional management. I propose
to allocate a sum of `500 crore for this purpose.

26. India’s agri-exports potential is as high as US $ 100 billion against
current exports of US $ 30 billion. To realize this potential, export of agri-
commodities will be liberalized. I also propose to set up state-of-the-art
testing facilities in all the forty two Mega Food Parks.

27. I propose to extend the facility of Kisan Credit Cards to fisheries and
animal husbandry farmers to help them meet their working capital needs.
Small and marginal farmers will get more benefits.

28. Bamboo is ‘Green Gold’. We removed bamboo grown outside
forest areas from the definition of trees. Now, I propose to launch a Re-
structured National Bamboo Mission with an outlay of `1290 crore to
promote bamboo sector in a holistic manner.

29. Many farmers are installing solar water pumps to irrigate their
fields. Generation of solar electricity is harvesting of Sun by the farmers

 7

using their lands. Government of India will take necessary measures and
encourage State Governments to put in place a mechanism that their
surplus solar power is purchased by the distribution companies or
licencees at reasonably remunerative rates.

30. Our Government set up a Long Term Irrigation Fund (LTIF) in
NABARD for meeting funding requirement of irrigation works. Scope of the
Fund would be expanded to cover specified command area development
projects.

31. Last year, I had announced setting up of Micro Irrigation Fund
(MIF) for facilitating expansion of coverage under micro irrigation and
Dairy Processing Infrastructure Development Fund (DPIDF) to help finance
investment in dairying infrastructure. It is now time to expand such
focused investment Funds. I, now, announce setting up a Fisheries and
Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FAIDF) for fisheries sector
and an Animal Husbandry Infrastructure Development Fund (AHIDF) for
financing infrastructure requirement of animal husbandry sector. Total
Corpus of these two new Funds would be `10,000 crore.

32. Our Government has been steadily increasing the volume of
institutional credit for agriculture sector from year-to-year from `8.5 lakh
crore in 2014-15 to `10 lakh crore in 2017-18. I now propose to raise this
to `11 lakh crore for the year 2018-19.

33. Presently, lessee cultivators are not able to avail crop loans.
Consequently, a significant proportion of arable land remains fallow and
tenant cultivators are forced to secure credit from usurious money
lenders. NITI Aayog, in consultation with State Governments, will evolve a
suitable mechanism to enable access of lessee cultivators to credit without
compromising the rights of the land owners.

34. Government will extend a favourable taxation treatment to Farmer
Producers Organisations (FPOs) for helping farmers aggregate their needs
of inputs, farm services, processing and sale operations.
I shall give details in Part B of my speech.

35. Air pollution in the Delhi-NCR region has been a cause of concern.
A special Scheme will be implemented to support the efforts of the
governments of Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and the NCT of Delhi to
address air pollution and to subsidize machinery required for in-situ
management of crop residue.

 8

36. Madam Speaker, the present top leadership of this country has
reached at this level after seeing poverty at close quarters. Our leadership is
familiar with the problems being faced by the SC, ST, Backward Classes and
economically weaker sections of the society. People belonging to poor and
middle class are not case studies for them, on the other hand they
themselves are case study.

37. The Lower and Middle Class have been the focus of our Government
during the last three years. This Government is continuously striving to
alleviate all the small and major problems of the poor.

38. We launched Prime Minister’s Ujjwala Scheme to make poor women
free from the smoke of wood. Initially our target was to provide free LPG
connections to about 5 crore poor women. But in view of the pace of
implementation of Ujjwala scheme and its popularity among the women,
we propose to increase the target of providing free connection to 8 crore
poor women.

39. Our Government has launched Prime Minister Saubhagya Yojana for
providing electricity to all households of the country. Under this scheme,
four crores poor households are being provided with electricity connection
free of charge. We are spending `16000 crore under this scheme. You can
very well imagine our anxiety and restlessness even with one hour power
cut. Think about those women and children whose houses will not get
electricity. Their life is going to change because of Pradhan Mantri
Saubhagya Yojana.

40. Swachh Bharat Mission has benefited the poor. Under this mission,
Government has already constructed more than 6 crore toilets. The positive
effect of these toilets is being seen on the dignity of ladies, education of
girls and the overall health of family. Government is planning to construct
around 2 crore toilets.

41. Madam Speaker, a roof for his family is another concern of the poor.
Far from the Benami properties earned by corruption, the poor only desire
to have a roof, a small house by his earning of honesty. Our Govt. is helping
them so that they may fulfil the dream of their own house. We have fixed a
target that every poor of this country may have his own house by 2022. For
this purpose Prime Minister Awas Yojana has been launched in rural and
urban areas of the country. Under Prime Minister Awas Scheme Rural, 51
lakhs houses in year 2017-18 and 51 lakh houses during 2018-19 which is
more than one crore houses will be constructed exclusively in rural areas. In
urban areas the assistance has been sanctioned to construct 37 lakh houses.

 9

42. My Government will also establish a dedicated Affordable Housing
Fund (AHF) in National Housing Bank, funded from priority sector lending
shortfall and fully serviced bonds authorized by the Government of India.

43. Loans to Self Help Groups of women increased to about Rupees
42,500 crore in 2016-17, growing 37% over previous year. The
Government is confident that loans to SHGs will increase to `75,000 crore
by March, 2019. I propose to substantially increase allocation of National
Rural Livelihood Mission to `5750 crore in 2018-19.

44. Ground water irrigation scheme under Prime Minister Krishi Sinchai
Yojna- Har Khet ko Pani will be taken up in 96 deprived irrigation districts
where less than 30% of the land holdings gets assured irrigation presently.
I have allocated `2600 crore for this purpose.

45. As my proposals outlined indicate, focus of the Government next
year will be on providing maximum livelihood opportunities in the rural
areas by spending more on livelihood, agriculture and allied activities and
construction of rural infrastructure. In the year 2018-19, for creation of
livelihood and infrastructure in rural areas, total amount to be spent by
the Ministries will be `14.34 lakh crore, including extra-budgetary and non-
budgetary resources of `11.98 lakh crore. Apart from employment due to
farming activities and self employment, this expenditure will create
employment of 321 crore person days, 3.17 lakh kilometers of rural roads,
51 lakh new rural houses, 1.88 crore toilets, and provide 1.75 crore new
household electric connections besides boosting agricultural growth.
Details are in Annexure I.

 Health, Education and Social Protection
46. My Government’s goal is to assist and provide opportunity to every
Indian to realize her full potential capable of achieving her economic and
social dreams. Our Government is implementing a comprehensive social
security and protection programme to reach every household of old,
widows, orphaned children, divyaang and deprived as per the Socio-
Economic Caste Census. Allocation on National Social Assistance
Programme this year has been kept at `9975 crore.

47. We have managed to get children to School but the quality of
education is still a cause of serious concern. We have now defined
learning outcomes and National Survey of more than 20 lakh children has
been conducted to assess the status on the ground. This will help in

 10

devising a district-wise strategy for improving quality of education. We
now propose to treat education holistically without segmentation from
pre-nursery to Class 12.

48. Improvement in quality of teachers can improve the quality of
education in the country. We will initiate an integrated B.Ed. programme
for teachers. Training of teachers during service is extremely critical. We
have amended the Right to Education Act to enable more than 13 lakh
untrained teachers to get trained.

49. Technology will be the biggest driver in improving the quality of
education. We propose to increase the digital intensity in education and
move gradually from ‘‘black board’’ to ‘‘digital board’’. Technology will also
be used to upgrade the skills of teachers through the recently launched
digital portal ‘‘DIKSHA’’.

50. The Government is committed to provide the best quality
education to the tribal children in their own environment. To realise this
mission, it has been decided that by the year 2022, every block with more
than 50% ST population and at least 20,000 tribal persons, will have an
Ekalavya Model Residential School. Ekalavya schools will be on par with
Navodaya Vidyalayas and will have special facilities for preserving local art
and culture besides providing training in sports and skill development.

51. To step up investments in research and related infrastructure in
premier educational institutions, including health institutions, I propose to
launch a major initiative named ‘‘Revitalising Infrastructure and Systems in
Education (RISE) by 2022’’ with a total investment of `1,00,000 crore in
next four years. Higher Education Financing Agency (HEFA) would be
suitably structured for funding this initiative.

52. Our Government has taken major initiative of setting up Institutes
of Eminence. There has been tremendous response to this initiative by
institutions both in public and private sectors. We have received more
than 100 applications. We have also taken steps to set up a specialized
Railways University at Vadodara.

53. We propose to set up two new full-fledged Schools of Planning and
Architecture, to be selected on challenge mode. Additionally, 18 new SPAs
would be established in the IITs and NITs as autonomous Schools, also on
challenge mode.

54. The Government would launch the ‘‘Prime Minister’s Research
Fellows (PMRF)’’ Scheme this year. Under this, we would identify 1,000

 11

best B.Tech students each year from premier institutions and provide
them facilities to do Ph.D in IITs and IISc, with a handsome fellowship. It is
expected that these bright young fellows would voluntarily commit few
hours every week for teaching in higher educational institutions.

55. Now I come to the Health Sector. ºÉ´ÉäÇ £É´ÉxiÉÖ:
ºÉÖÉÊJÉxÉ, ºÉ´ÉäÇ ºÉÆiÉÖ: ÉÊxÉ®ÉàÉªÉÉ is the guiding
principle of my Government. Only Swasth Bharat can be a Samriddha
Bharat. India cannot realize its demographic dividend without its citizens
being healthy.

56. I am pleased to announce two major initiatives as part of
‘‘Ayushman Bharat’’ programme aimed at making path breaking
interventions to address health holistically, in primary, secondary and
tertiary care system covering both prevention and health promotion.

57. The National Health Policy, 2017 has envisioned Health and
Wellness Centres as the foundation of India’s health system. These 1.5
lakh centres will bring health care system closer to the homes of people.
These centres will provide comprehensive health care, including for non-
communicable diseases and maternal and child health services. These
centres will also provide free essential drugs and diagnostic services.
I am committing `1200 crore in this budget for this flagship programme. I
also invite contribution of private sector through CSR and philanthropic
institutions in adopting these centres.

58. Madam Speaker, we are all aware that lakhs of families in our
country have to borrow or sell assets to receive indoor treatment in
hospitals. Government is seriously concerned about such impoverishment
of poor and vulnerable families. Present Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana
(RSBY) provide annual coverage of only `30,000 to poor families. Several
State Governments have also implemented/supplemented health
protection schemes providing varying coverage. My Government has now
decided to take health protection to more aspirational level.

59. We will launch a flagship National Health Protection Scheme to
cover over 10 crore poor and vulnerable families (approximately 50 crore
beneficiaries) providing coverage upto 5 lakh rupees per family per year
for secondary and tertiary care hospitalization. This will be the world’s
largest government funded health care programme. Adequate funds will
be provided for smooth implementation of this programme.

 12

60. Madam Speaker, these two far-reaching initiatives under the
Ayushman Bharat will build a New India 2022 and ensure enhanced
productivity, well being and avert wage loss and impoverishment. These
Schemes will also generate lakhs of jobs, particularly for women. The
Government is steadily but surely progressing towards the goal of Universal
Health Coverage.

61. TB claims more lives every year than any other infectious disease.
It affects mainly poor and malnourished people. My Government has,
therefore, decided to allocate additional `600 crore to provide nutritional
support to all TB patients at the rate of `500 per month for the duration of
their treatment.

62. In order to further enhance accessibility of quality medical
education and health care, we will be setting up 24 new Government
Medical Colleges and Hospitals by upgrading existing district hospitals in
the country. This would ensure that there is at least 1 Medical College for
every 3 Parliamentary Constituencies and at least 1 Government Medical
College in each State of the country.

63. Our resolve of making our villages open defecation free is aimed at
improving the life of our villagers. We will launch a Scheme called
Galvanizing Organic Bio-Agro Resources Dhan (GOBAR-DHAN) for
management and conversion of cattle dung and solid waste in farms to
compost, fertilizer, bio-gas and bio-CNG.

64. Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Beema Yojana (PMJJBY) has benefitted
5.22 crore families with a life insurance cover of `2 lakh on payment of a
premium of only `330/- per annum. Likewise, under Pradhan Mantri
Suraksha Bima Yojana, 13 crore 25 lakh persons have been insured with
personal accident cover of `2 lakh on payment of a premium of only `12
per annum. The Government will work to cover all poor households,
including SC/ST households, under these in a mission mode.

65. The Government will expand the coverage under Prime Minister
Jan Dhan Yojana by bringing all sixty crore basic accounts within its fold
and undertake measures to provide services of micro insurance and
unorganized sector pension schemes through these accounts.

66. Our commitment towards ‘‘Beti Bachao Beti Padhao’’ is unflinching.
Sukanya Samriddhi Account Scheme launched in January 2015 has been a
great success. Until November, 2017 more than 1.26 crore accounts have

 13

been opened across the country in the name of girl-child securing an
amount of `19,183 crore.

67. Cleaning the Ganga is work of national importance and it is our
firm commitment. Members will be happy to learn that this work has
gathered speed. A total of 187 projects have been sanctioned under the
Namami Gange programme for infrastructure development, river surface
cleaning, rural sanitation and other interventions at a cost of
`16,713 crore. 47 projects have been completed and remaining projects
are at various stages of execution. All 4465 Ganga Grams – villages on
the bank of river - have been declared open defecation free.

68. To give focused attention and to achieve our vision of an inclusive
society, the Government has identified 115 aspirational districts taking
various indices of development in consideration. The Government aims at
improving the quality of life in these districts by investing in social services
like health, education, nutrition, skill upgradation, financial inclusion and
infrastructure like irrigation, rural electrification, potable drinking water
and access to toilets at an accelerated pace and in a time bound manner.
We expect these 115 districts to become model of development.

69. Economic and social advancement of hard working people of
Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled Tribes (STs) has received core
attention of Government. Our Government increased total earmarked
allocation for SCs in 279 programmes from `34,334 crore in 2016-17 to
`52,719 crore in RE 2017-18. Likewise, for STs, earmarked allocation was
increased from `21,811 crore in 2016-17 to `32,508 crore in
RE 2017-18 in 305 programmes. I propose an earmarked allocation of
`56,619 crore for SCs and `39,135 crore for STs in BE 2018-19.

70. Government’s estimated schematic budgetary expenditure on
health, education and social protection for 2018-19 is `1.38 lakh crore
against estimated expenditure of `1.22 lakh crore in BE 2017-18. Details
are in Annexure II. This expenditure is likely to go up by at least `15,000
crore in 2018-19 on account of additional allocation during the year and
extra budgetary expenditure, including through Higher Education Financing
Agency.

 Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises (MSMEs) and
 Employment

 14

71. Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises (MSMEs) are a major engine
of growth and employment in the country. I have provided
`3794 crore to MSME Sector for giving credit support, capital and interest
subsidy and innovations. Massive formalization of the businesses of
MSMEs is taking place in the country after demonetization and
introduction of GST. This is generating enormous financial information
database of MSMEs’ businesses and finances. This big data base will be
used for improving financing of MSMEs’ capital requirement, including
working capital.

72. It is proposed to onboard public sector banks and corporates on
Trade Electronic Receivable Discounting System (TReDS) platform and link
this with GSTN. Online loan sanctioning facility for MSMEs will be
revamped for prompt decision making by the banks. Government will
soon announce measures for effectively addressing non-performing assets
and stressed accounts of MSMEs. This will enable larger financing of
MSMEs and also considerably ease cash flow challenges faced by them. In
order to reduce tax burden on MSMEs and to create larger number of
jobs, I will be announcing some tax measures in Part B of my speech.

73. MUDRA Yojana launched in April, 2015 has led to sanction of `4.6
lakh crore in credit from 10.38 crore MUDRA loans. 76% of loan accounts
are of women and more than 50% belong to SCs, STs and OBCs. It is
proposed to set a target of `3 lakh crore for lending under MUDRA for
2018-19 after having successfully exceeded the targets in all previous
years.

74. Non-Bank Finance Companies (NBFCs) stepped up financing of
MSMEs after demonetization. NBFCs can be very powerful vehicle for
delivering loans under MUDRA. Refinancing policy and eligibility criteria
set by MUDRA will be reviewed for better refinancing of NBFCs.

75. Use of Fintech in financing space will help growth of MSMEs. A
group in the Ministry of Finance is examining the policy and institutional
development measures needed for creating right environment for Fintech
companies to grow in India.

76. Venture Capital Funds and the angel investors need an innovative
and special developmental and regulatory regime for their growth. We
have taken a number of policy measures including launching ‘‘Start-Up
India’’ program, building very robust alternative investment regime in the
country and rolling out a taxation regime designed for the special nature
of the VCFs and the angel investors. We will take additional measures to

 15

strengthen the environment for their growth and successful operation of
alternative investment funds in India.

77. Creating job opportunities and facilitating generation of
employment has been at the core of our policy-making. During the last
three years, we have taken a number of steps to boost employment
generation in the country. These measures include:-

  Contribution of 8.33% of Employee Provident Fund (EPF) for
 new employees by the Government for three years.

  Contribution of 12% to EPF for new employees for three
 years by the Government in sectors employing large
 number of people like textile, leather and footwear.

  Additional deduction to the employees of 30% of the wages
 paid for new employees under the Income Tax Act.

  Launch of National Apprenticeship Scheme with stipend
 support and sharing of the cost of basic training by the
 Government to give training to 50 lakh youth by 2020.

  Introducing system of fixed term employment for apparel
 and footwear sector.

  Increasing paid maternity leave from 12 weeks to 26 weeks,
 along with provision of crèches.

78. These measures have started showing results. An independent
study conducted recently has shown that 70 lakh formal jobs will be
created this year.

79. To carry forward this momentum, I am happy to announce that the
Government will contribute 12% of the wages of the new employees in
the EPF for all the sectors for next three years. Also, the facility of fixed
term employment will be extended to all sectors.

80. To incentivize employment of more women in the formal sector
and to enable higher take-home wages, I propose to make amendments in
the Employees Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 to
reduce women employees' contribution to 8% for first three years of their
employment against existing rate of 12% or 10% with no change in
employers' contribution.

 16

81. The Government is setting up a model aspirational skill centre in
every district of the country under Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Kendra
Programme. 306 Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Kendra have been established
for imparting skill training through such centers.

82. The Government had approved a comprehensive textile sector
package of `6000 crore in 2016 to boost the apparel and made-up
segments. I, now propose to provide an outlay of `7148 crore for the
textile sector in 2018-19.



 Infrastructure and Financial Sector Development
83. Infrastructure is the growth driver of economy. Our country needs
massive investments estimated to be in excess of `50 lakh crore in
infrastructure to increase growth of GDP, connect and integrate the nation
with a network of roads, airports, railways, ports and inland waterways
and to provide good quality services to our people.

84. We have made an all-time high allocation to rail and road sectors.
We are committed to further enhance public investment. Provision of key
linkages like coal for power, power for railways and railway rakes for coal
have been rationalized and made very efficient. Prime Minister personally
reviews the targets and achievements in infrastructure sectors on a
regular basis. Using online monitoring system of PRAGATI alone, projects
worth 9.46 lakh crore have been facilitated and fast tracked.

85. To secure India’s defences, we are developing connectivity
infrastructure in border areas. Rohtang tunnel has been completed to
provide all weather connectivity to the Ladakh region. Contract for
construction of Zozila Pass tunnel of more than 14 kilometer is progressing
well. I now propose to take up construction of tunnel under Sela Pass. For
promoting tourism and emergency medical care, Government will make
necessary framework for encouraging investment in sea plane activities.

86. Urbanization is our opportunity and priority. My Government has
rolled out two interlinked programmes – Smart Cities Mission and the
AMRUT.

87. Smart Cities Mission aims at building 100 Smart Cities with state-of-
the-art amenities. I am happy to inform that 99 Cities have been selected
with an outlay of `2.04 lakh crore. These Cities have started implementing
various projects like Smart Command and Control Centre, Smart Roads,

 17

Solar Rooftops, Intelligent Transport Systems, Smart Parks. Projects worth
`2350 crore have been completed and works of `20,852 crore are under
progress. To preserve and revitalize soul of the heritage cities in India,
National Heritage City Development and Augmentation Yojana (HRIDAY)
has been taken up in a major way.

88. India is blessed with an abundance of tourist attractions. It is
proposed to develop ten prominent tourist sites into Iconic Tourism
destinations by following a holistic approach involving infrastructure and
skill development, development of technology, attracting private
investment, branding and marketing. In addition, tourist amenities at 100
Adarsh monuments of the Archaeological Survey of India will be upgraded
to enhance visitor experience.

89. The AMRUT programme focuses on providing water supply to all
households in 500 cities. State level plans of `77,640 crore for 500 cities
have been approved. Water supply contracts for 494 projects worth
`19,428 crore and sewerage work contract for 272 projects costing `12,429
crore has been awarded.

90. Reforms are being catalyzed by these missions. 482 cities have
started credit rating. 144 cities have got investment grade rating.

91. My Ministry will leverage the India Infrastructure Finance
Corporation Limited (IIFCL) to help finance major infrastructure projects,
including investments in educational and health infrastructure, on strategic
and larger societal benefit considerations.

92. Our Government has scaled new heights in development of Road
Infrastructure sector. We are confident to complete National Highways
exceeding 9000 kilometers length during 2017-18. Ambitious Bharatmala
Pariyojana has been approved for providing seamless connectivity of
interior and backward areas and borders of the country to develop about
35000 kms in Phase-I at an estimated cost of `5,35,000 crore. To raise
equity from the market for its mature road assets, NHAI will consider
organizing its road assets into Special Purpose Vehicles and use innovative
monetizing structures like Toll, Operate and Transfer (TOT) and
Infrastructure Investment Funds (InvITs).

93. Strengthening the railway network and enhancing Railways’
carrying capacity has been a major focus of the Government. Railways’
Capex for the year 2018-19 has been pegged at `1,48,528 crore. A large
part of the Capex is devoted to capacity creation. 18,000 kilometers of

 18

doubling, third and fourth line works and 5000 kilometers of gauge
conversion would eliminate capacity constraints and transform almost
entire network into Broad Gauge.

94. There has also been significant improvement in the achievement of
physical targets by Railways as well. We are moving fast towards optimal
electrification of railway network. 4000 kilometers are targeted for
commissioning during 2017-18.

95. Work on Eastern and Western dedicated Freight Corridors is in full
swing. Adequate number of rolling stock – 12000 wagons, 5160 coaches
and approximately 700 locomotives are being procured during 2018-19. A
major programme has been initiated to strengthen infrastructure at the
Goods sheds and fast track commissioning of private sidings.

96. A ‘Safety First’ policy, with allocation of adequate funds under
Rashtriya Rail Sanraksha Kosh is cornerstone of Railways’ focus on safety.
Maintenance of track infrastructure is being given special attention. Over
3600 kms of track renewal is targeted during the current fiscal. Other
major steps include increasing use of technology like ‘‘Fog Safe’’ and
‘‘Train Protection and Warning System’’. A decision has been taken to
eliminate 4267 unmanned level crossings in the broad gauge network in
the next two years.

97. Redevelopment of 600 major railway stations is being taken up by
Indian Railway Station Development Co. Ltd. All stations with more than
25000 footfalls will have escalators. All railway stations and trains will be
progressively provided with wi-fi. CCTVs will be provided at all stations
and on trains to enhance security of passengers. Modern train-sets with
state-of-the-art amenities and features are being designed at Integrated
Coach Factory, Perambur. First such train-set will be commissioned during
2018-19.

98. Mumbai’s transport system, the lifeline of the City, is being
expanded and augmented to add 90 kilometers of double line tracks at a
cost of over `11,000 crore. 150 kilometers of additional suburban network
is being planned at a cost of over `40,000 crore, including elevated
corridors on some sections. A suburban network of approximately 160
kilometers at an estimated cost of `17,000 crore is being planned to cater
to the growth of the Bengaluru metropolis.

99. Foundation for the Mumbai-Ahmedabad bullet train project, India’s
first high speed rail project was laid on September 14, 2017. An Institute is

 19

coming up at Vadodara to train manpower required for high speed rail
projects.

100. In the last three years, the domestic air passenger traffic grew at
18% per annum and our airline companies placed orders for more than
900 aircrafts. Regional connectivity scheme of UDAN (Ude Desh ka Aam
Nagrik) initiated by the Government last year shall connect 56 unserved
airports and 31 unserved helipads across the country. Operations have
already started at 16 such airports. ºÉ®BÉEÉ® BÉEÉÒ <ºÉ {ÉcãÉ
ºÉä c´ÉÉ<Ç SÉ{{ÉãÉ {ÉcxÉxÉä ´ÉÉãÉä xÉÉMÉÉÊ®BÉE
£ÉÉÒ c´ÉÉ<Ç VÉcÉVÉ àÉä ªÉÉjÉÉ BÉE® ®cä cé* Airport
Authority of India (AAI) has 124 airports. We propose to expand our
airport capacity more than five times to handle a billion trips a year under
a new initiative - NABH Nirman. Balance sheet of AAI shall be leveraged to
raise more resources for funding this expansion.

101. Our efforts to set up a Coalition on Disaster Resilient Infrastructure
for developing international good practices, appropriate standards and
regulatory mechanism for resilient infrastructure development are moving
well. I propose to allocate `60 crores to kick start this initiative in 2018-19.

102. The Government and market regulators have taken necessary
measures for development of monetizing vehicles like Infrastructure
Investment Trust (InvIT) and Real Investment Trust (ReITs) in India. The
Government would initiate monetizing select CPSE assets using InvITs from
next year.

103. In the current year, we included, in the scope of harmonized list of
infrastructure, ropeways to promote tourism, logistics parks and expanded
the scope of railways infrastructure to include development of commercial
land around railway stations.

104. Reserve Bank of India has issued guidelines to nudge Corporates
access bond market. SEBI will also consider mandating, beginning with
large Corporates, to meet about one-fourth of their financing needs from
the bond market.

105. Corporate bonds rated ‘BBB’ or equivalent are investment grade. In
India, most regulators permit bonds with the ‘AA’ rating only as eligible for
investment. It is now time to move from ‘AA’ to ‘A’ grade ratings. The
government and concerned regulators will take necessary action.

 20

106. We will take reform measures with respect to stamp duty regime
on financial securities transactions in consultation with the States and
make necessary amendments the Indian Stamp Act.

107. International Financial Service Centre (IFSC) at Gift City, which has
become operational, needs a coherent and integrated regulatory
framework to fully develop and to compete with other offshore financial
centres. The Government will establish a unified authority for regulating
all financial services in IFSCs in India.

108. Global economy is transforming into a digital economy thanks to
development of cutting edge technologies in digital space – machine
learning, artificial intelligence, internet of things, 3D printing and the like.
Initiatives such as Digital India, Start Up India, Make in India would help
India establish itself as a knowledge and digital society. NITI Aayog will
initiate a national program to direct our efforts in the area of artificial
intelligence, including research and development of its applications.
109. Combining cyber and physical systems have great potential to
transform not only innovation ecosystem but also our economies and the
way we live. To invest in research, training and skilling in robotics, artificial
intelligence, digital manufacturing, big data analysis, quantum
communication and internet of things, Department of Science &
Technology will launch a Mission on Cyber Physical Systems to support
establishment of centres of excellence. I have doubled the allocation on
Digital India programme to ` 3073 crore in 2018-19.

110. Task of connecting one lakh gram panchayat through high speed
optical fiber network has been completed under phase I of the Bharatnet
project. This has enabled broadband access to over 20 crore rural Indians
in about two lakh fifty thousand villages. The Government also proposes
to setup five lakh wi-fi hotspots which will provide broadband access to
five crore rural citizens. I have provided `10000 crore in 2018-19 for
creation and augmentation of Telecom infrastructure.
111. To harness the benefit of emerging new technologies, particularly
the ‘Fifth Generation’ (5G) technologies and its adoption, the Department
of Telecom will support establishment of an indigenous 5G Test Bed at IIT,
Chennai.
112. Distributed ledger system or the block chain technology allows
organization of any chain of records or transactions without the need of
intermediaries. The Government does not consider crypto-currencies legal
tender or coin and will take all measures to eliminate use of these crypto-
assets in financing illegitimate activities or as part of the payment system.

 21

The Government will explore use of block chain technology proactively for
ushering in digital economy.
113. The system of toll payments physically by cash at road toll plazas is
being fast replaced with Fastags and other electronic payment systems to
make road travel seamless. Number of Fastags has gone up from about
60,000 in December, 2016 to more than 10 lakh now. From December,
2017 all class ‘‘M’’ and ‘‘N’’ vehicles are being sold only with the Fastags.
The Government will come out with a policy to introduce toll system on
‘‘pay as you use’’ basis.

114. In order to create employment and aid growth, Government’s
estimated budgetary and extra budgetary expenditure on infrastructure
for 2018-19 is being increased to `5.97 lakh crore against estimated
expenditure of `4.94 lakh crore in 2017-18. Details are in Annexure III.

 Building Institutions and Improving Public Service Delivery
115. Our armed forces have played a stellar role in meeting the
challenges we have been facing on our borders as well as in managing the
internal security environment both in Jammu and Kashmir and the North
East. I would like to place on record our appreciation for the efforts and
the sacrifices made by the three services in defending the interests of the
Nation.
116. Ever since the NDA Government has assumed office in 2014, lot of
emphasis has been given to modernizing and enhancing the operational
capability of the Defence Forces. A number of initiatives have been taken
to develop and nurture intrinsic defence production capability to make the
Nation self-reliant for meeting our defence needs. Ensuring adequate
budgetary support will be our priority.
117. We have opened up private investment in defence production
including liberalizing foreign direct investment. We will take measures to
develop two defence industrial production corridors in the country. The
Government will also bring out an industry friendly Defence Production
Policy 2018 to promote domestic production by public sector, private
sector and MSMEs.
118. Aadhar has provided an identity to every Indian. Aadhar has eased
delivery of so many public services to our people. Every enterprise, major
or small, also needs a unique ID. The Government will evolve a Scheme to
assign every individual enterprise in India a
unique ID.

 22

119. To carry the business reforms for ease of doing business deeper
and in every State of India, the Government of India has identified 372
specific business reform actions. All States have taken up these reforms
and simplifications in a mission mode constructively competing with each
other. Evaluation of performance under this Programme will now be
based on user feedback.
120. Capital of the Food Corporation of India will be restructured to
enhance equity and to raise long-term debt for meeting its standing
working capital requirement.
121. Budgeting of Government of India’s contribution in equity and debt
of the metro ventures floated by the State Governments will be
streamlined.
122. Department of Commerce will be developing a National Logistics
Portal as a single window online market place to link all stakeholders.
123. The Government has approved listing of 14 CPSEs, including two
insurance companies, on the stock exchanges. The Government has also
initiated the process of strategic disinvestment in 24 CPSEs. This includes
strategic privatization of Air India.
124. Process of acquisition of Hindustan Petroleum Corporation by the
ONGC has been successfully completed. Three public sector general
insurance companies National Insurance Company Ltd., United India
Assurance Company Limited and Oriental India Insurance Company Limited
will be merged into a single insurance entity and will be subsequently
listed.
125. The Government introduced Exchange Traded Fund Bharat-22 to
raise `14,500 crore, which was over-subscribed in all segments. DIPAM will
come up with more ETF offers including debt ETF.
126. 2017-18 Budget Estimates for disinvestment were pegged at the
highest ever level of `72,500 crore. I am happy to inform the House that
we have already exceeded the budget estimates. I am assuming receipts of
`1,00,000 crore in 2017-18. I am setting the disinvestment target of
`80,000 crore for 2018-19.

127. Bank recapitalization program has been launched with bonds of
`80,000 crore being issued this year. The programme has been integrated
with an ambitious reform agenda, under the rubric of an Enhanced Access
and Service Excellence (EASE) programme. This recapitalization will pave

 23

the way for the public sector banks to lend additional credit of `5 lakh
crore.
128. It is proposed to allow strong Regional Rural Banks to raise capital
from the market to enable them increase their credit to rural economy.
129. National Housing Bank Act is being amended to transfer its equity
from the Reserve Bank of India to the Government. Indian Post Offices
Act, Provident Fund Act and National Saving Certificate Act are being
amalgamated and certain additional people friendly measures are being
introduced. To provide the Reserve Bank of India an instrument to manage
excess liquidity, Reserve Bank of India Act is being amended to
institutionalize an Uncollateralized Deposit Facility. Securities and
Exchange Board of India, Act 1992, Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act
1956, and Depositories Act 1996, are being amended to streamline
adjudication procedures and to provide for penalties for certain
infractions. These proposals are in the Finance Bill.
130. For easier access, links to all Detailed Demand for Grants will be
provided at india.gov.in. The Government will also consider feasibility of
providing disclosed fiscal information in a machine readable form.
131. The Government is transforming method of disposal of its business
by introduction of e-office and other e-governance initiatives in central
Ministries and Departments. These initiatives are listed in Annexure IV.
132. The Government will formulate a comprehensive Gold Policy to
develop gold as an asset class. The Government will also establish a
system of consumer friendly and trade efficient system of regulated gold
exchanges in the country. Gold Monetization Scheme will be revamped to
enable people to open a hassle-free Gold Deposit Account.
133. Outward Direct Investment (ODI) from India has grown to US$15
billion per annum. The Government will review existing guidelines and
processes and bring out a coherent and integrated Outward Direct
Investment (ODI) policy.
134. Hybrid instruments are suitable for attracting foreign investments
in several niche areas, especially for the startups and venture capital firms.
The Government will evolve a separate policy for the hybrid instruments.
135. The emoluments of the President, the Vice President and the
Governors were last revised with effect from 1st January, 2006. These
emoluments are proposed to be revised to `5 lakh for the President,
`4 lakhs for the Vice President and to `3.5 lakh per month for the
Governors.

 24

136. There has been a public debate with regard to the emoluments
paid to the Members of Parliament. Present practice allows the recipients
to fix their own emoluments which invites criticism. I am, therefore,
proposing necessary changes to refix the salary, constituency allowance,
office expenses and meeting allowance payable to Members of Parliament
with effect from April 1, 2018. The law will also provide for automatic
revision of emoluments every five years indexed to inflation. I am sure
Hon’ble Members will welcome this initiative and will not suffer such
criticism in future.
137. Our country will commemorate 150th birth anniversary of
Mahatma Gandhi, Father of the Nation, from 2nd October, 2019 to 2nd
October 2020. The Government and the People of India will rededicate
them, through their actions, to the ideals that the Mahatma taught and
lived by. A National Committee, chaired by the Prime Minister, which
includes Chief Ministers of all the States, representatives from across the
political spectrum, Gandhians, thinkers and eminent persons from all walks
of life, has been constituted to formulate a Commemoration Programme.
My Government has earmarked `150 crore for the year 2018-19 for the
activities leading to the Commemoration.

 Section III - Fiscal Management
138. I now turn to the fiscal situation for 2017-18 and fiscal estimates
for 2018-19.
139. In 2017-18, Central Government will be receiving GST revenues
only for 11 months, instead of 12 months. This will have fiscal effect.
There has also been some shortfall in Non-Tax revenues on account of
certain developments, including deferment of spectrum auction. A part of
this shortfall has been made up through higher direct tax revenues and
bigger disinvestment receipts.

140. Total Revised Estimates for expenditure in 2017-18 are `21.57 lakh
crore (net of GST compensation transfers to the States) as against the
Budget Estimates of `21.47 lakh crore.

141. Our Government assumed office in May, 2014 when fiscal deficit
was running at very high levels. Fiscal Deficit for 2013-14 was 4.4% of GDP.
The Prime Minister and the Government have always attached utmost
priority to prudent fiscal management and controlling fiscal deficit. As
Hon’ble Members would recall, we embarked on the path of consistent
fiscal reduction and consolidation in 2014. Fiscal Deficit was brought
down to 4.1% in 2014-15 to 3.9% in 2015-16, and to 3.5% in 2016-17.

 25

Revised Fiscal Deficit estimates for 2017-18 are `5.95 lakh crore at 3.5% of
GDP. I am projecting a Fiscal Deficit of 3.3% of GDP for the year 2018-19.
142. In order to impart unquestionable credibility to the Government’s
commitment for the revised fiscal glide path, I am proposing to accept key
recommendations of the Fiscal Reform and Budget Management
Committee relating to adoption of the Debt Rule and to bring down
Central Government’s Debt to GDP ratio to 40%. Government has also
accepted the recommendation to use Fiscal Deficit target as the key
operational parameter. Necessary amendment proposals are included in
the Finance Bill.

 26

