Press Release Page | Press Information Bureau Ministry of Commerce & Industry Prime Minister Sh. Narendra Modi addresses Bharat Mobility Global Expo 2024 “India is on the move and is moving fast”: PM Modi India will become largest EV market in the world by 2030: Shri. Piyush Goyal Government’s prudent fiscal policy to support mobility sector: Shri. Goyal India has become the fifth largest global economy under the leadership of Prime Minister Modi: Shri Goyal For the first time mobility, its allied sectors, and even startups associated with it, have come together on one stage at Bharat Mobility: Shri Goyal प्रविष्टि तिथि:
                02 FEB 2024 7:39PM by PIB Delhi The Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi addressed a program at India’s largest and first-of-its-kind mobility exhibition - Bharat Mobility Global Expo 2024 at Bharat Mandapam, New Delhi today. He also took a walkthrough of the Expo. Bharat Mobility Global Expo 2024 showcases India’s capabilities across mobility and automotive value chains and will feature exhibitions, conferences, buyer-seller meets, state sessions, road safety pavilion, and public-centric attractions like go-karting. Addressing the gathering, the Prime Minister congratulated the automotive industry of India for the grand event and praised the efforts of the exhibitors who showcased their products in the Expo. The Prime Minister said that the organization of an event of such grandeur and scale in the country fills him with delight and confidence. Recommending the people of Delhi to come and witness the Bharat Mobility Global Expo 2024, the Prime Minister said that it brings the entire mobility and supply chain community on a single platform. Reiterating the goal of Viksit Bharat by 2047, the Prime Minister underlined the pivotal role of the mobility sector. He repeated his call that he gave from the rampart of the Red Fort that ‘Yeh Hi Samay Hai, Sahi Samay Hai’- this is the right time. “India is on the move and is moving fast”, the Prime Minister said, highlighting that the present era is the beginning of the golden period for the mobility sector. Union Minister of Commerce & Industry, Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, and Textiles, Shri Piyush Goyal during his welcome address at the Bharat Mobility Global Expo 2024 said that Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi and his government is rapidly moving towards the vision of ‘Viksit Bharat’ by 2047, which envisions an inclusive development for all. The minister hailed PM’s comprehensive efforts to turn India from a ‘fragile five’ nation to fifth largest economy in the world. Shri Goyal hailed the Prime Minister for transforming the lives of the poor, the youth and the farmers in the country and enabling them to aspire for a better future. “The entire country has come together to make India a developed nation. Today, India is seen as a trusted  partner worldwide”, said Shri Goyal. Speaking about the recently concluded G20 Summit, the Minister said that the way India’s momentum and presence at the world stage was showcased by conducting 220 meetings in 60 cities showed our country’s potential to lead the world under the aegis of the Prime Minister. Sh. Goyal emphasised on the fiscal prudence of the interim budget 2024-2025 shown by the Prime Minister, noting the historic allocation of the capital expenditure for infrastructure projects in the country. The Minister emphasised the allocation, Rs 11,11,111 crore, is three times of the budget allocated in FY20 which will be only spent by the central government apart from the allocation of budget done by the state governments and the respective sectors. Further, he said that he believes that the mobility sector will receive a huge push when the infra spending of the three will be combined which will increase the potential of the sector leading to a bright future. Speaking about the rapid developmental growth witnessed in the country in terms of inland waterways and doubling of the number of ports, Shri Goyal said that he is determined of India’s ability to serve the demand of the entire world in the future. Lauding the Interim Budget 2024-25, the Minister said that prudent execution by the Prime Minister will ensure that the fiscal deficit will reduce gradually enabling decrease in interest rates and inflation creating conducive conditions for business activities in the country. Shri Goyal praised the foresight and guidance provided by the Prime Minister in creating world-class centres in the form of ‘Bharat Mandapam’ and ‘YashoBhoomi’ that has cemented India’s stature and has also underscored its prowess as a global leader in hosting conferences and conventions. Speaking about Bharat Mobility Global Expo 2024, Shri Goyal said that for the first time mobility and its allied sectors, even startups associated with it, have come together on one stage that has the ability to become an annual feature in the coming years. The Minister said that from cutting-edge technologies to sustainable solutions, this expo will highlight India’s prowess of its engineering capabilities in front of the world. Pioneering work in the advanced energy storage, e-mobility and green hydrogen technology sectors are recognised world over. “India will emerge as the world’s largest EV market by 2030”, the minister said. He encouraged the stakeholders in the mobility sector to take charge and transform the automotive landscape into an efficient, sustainable and inclusive part of the country as envisioned by the Prime Minister. He said that by fulfilling this vision, the country will become more connected enabling convenient and congestion free travel for its citizens. Further, he said that the upcoming textile exhibition from February 26-29 will demonstrate the vision of 3S - speed, skill and scale and present the new vision of a developed India to the world. *** AD/VN (रिलीज़ आईडी: 2002037) आगंतुक पटल  : 2852 इस विज्ञप्ति को इन भाषाओं में पढ़ें: Urdu , हिन्दी Ministry of Commerce & Industry Prime Minister Sh. Narendra Modi addresses Bharat Mobility Global Expo 2024 “India is on the move and is moving fast”: PM Modi India will become largest EV market in the world by 2030: Shri. Piyush Goyal Government’s prudent fiscal policy to support mobility sector: Shri. Goyal India has become the fifth largest global economy under the leadership of Prime Minister Modi: Shri Goyal For the first time mobility, its allied sectors, and even startups associated with it, have come together on one stage at Bharat Mobility: Shri Goyal प्रविष्टि तिथि:
                        02 FEB 2024 7:39PM by PIB Delhi The Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi addressed a program at India’s largest and first-of-its-kind mobility exhibition - Bharat Mobility Global Expo 2024 at Bharat Mandapam, New Delhi today. He also took a walkthrough of the Expo. Bharat Mobility Global Expo 2024 showcases India’s capabilities across mobility and automotive value chains and will feature exhibitions, conferences, buyer-seller meets, state sessions, road safety pavilion, and public-centric attractions like go-karting. Addressing the gathering, the Prime Minister congratulated the automotive industry of India for the grand event and praised the efforts of the exhibitors who showcased their products in the Expo. The Prime Minister said that the organization of an event of such grandeur and scale in the country fills him with delight and confidence. Recommending the people of Delhi to come and witness the Bharat Mobility Global Expo 2024, the Prime Minister said that it brings the entire mobility and supply chain community on a single platform. Reiterating the goal of Viksit Bharat by 2047, the Prime Minister underlined the pivotal role of the mobility sector. He repeated his call that he gave from the rampart of the Red Fort that ‘Yeh Hi Samay Hai, Sahi Samay Hai’- this is the right time. “India is on the move and is moving fast”, the Prime Minister said, highlighting that the present era is the beginni